Proceedings of the First BabyLM Workshop, pages 192–217
November 8, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics
Looking to Learn: Token-wise Dynamic Gating for Low-Resource
Vision-Language Modelling
Bianca-Mihaela Ganescu*
Suchir Salhan*
Andrew Caines
Paula Buttery
ALTA Institute
Department of Computer Science & Technology, University of Cambridge
Abstract
Training
vision-language
models
on
cognitively-plausible amounts of data re-
quires
rethinking
how
models
integrate
multimodal information. Within the constraints
of the Vision track for the BabyLM Challenge
2025, we propose a lightweight decoder-based
architecture with (1) token-wise dynamic
gating for adaptive fusion of linguistic and
visual cues, (2) feature modulation and channel
attention to maximise the utility of limited
visual information and (3) auxiliary contrastive
objectives for visual grounding. Evaluation on
five benchmarks (BLiMP, BLiMP Supplement,
EWoK, Winoground and VQA) shows compet-
itive or superior performance to multimodal
baselines. More notably, our dynamic gate
discovers interpretable patterns without explicit
supervision, favouring visual cues for content
words and linguistic cues for function words.
While we identify limitations in the Challenge
constraints, such as the information bottleneck
created by global image embeddings and
training instability from the dataset split, our
findings establish dynamic gating as a powerful
tool for efficient multimodal learning, offering
both interpretability and performance even
under severe constraints.
LookingtoLearn on HuggingFace (models,
tokenizers, and checkpoints)
Training Code Open-Sourced on GitHub
1
Introduction
Large language models have achieved impressive
capabilities, yet their learning process markedly
differs from naturalistic human language learning.
Children learn their first language from just tens of
millions of words (Warstadt et al., 2023; Gilkerson
et al., 2017) with minimal supervision, whereas
state-of-the-art language models require three to
four magnitudes more data (Warstadt et al., 2023).
*
Corresponding
Authors:
bmg44@cam.ac.uk,
sas245@cam.ac.uk
Transformer
Encoder 
Self-attention
Cross-attention
Gate
Text Embedding
Projection 
Layer
Output
Image 
token
× 𝑁
× 𝑀
Text
Figure 1: Simplified dual-stream architecture. The text
processing stream (top) embeds text input tokens and
feeds them through an N-layer transformer decoder,
which applies masked self-attention, cross-attention to
image features and a dynamic gating module to fuse
representations. The image processing stream (bottom)
projects a DINOv2 global token into the same space
and processes it with an M-layer transformer encoder.
The image processing stream, cross-attention and gating
modules are skipped for text-only samples.
Furthermore, human language learning is inher-
ently a multimodal process. Usually, visual ex-
periences play a crucial role in the acquisition of
early language and its expansion in the first years
of life (Rose et al., 2009; Morgenstern, 2014, 2023;
Karadöller et al., 2024). This cognitive reality mo-
tivates our work in the BabyLM Challenge Vision
track (Charpentier et al., 2025), where we develop
a framework inspired by human selective attention
that learns when and how to leverage visual cues
during language processing without explicit super-
vision.
Our proposed solution is a decoder-based vision-
language model for which we introduce three key
innovations. First, we implement a dynamic gat-
ing mechanism that learns to selectively weight
visual versus linguistic cues for each token based
on context. Second, we explore several feature
enhancement techniques in order to maximise
the utility of limited visual information. Third,
we investigate the impact of contrastive learning
auxiliary objective functions that operate at both
192

the sentence and word levels under low-resource
constraints.
In this work, we aim to answer several key ques-
tions:
1. Q: Can dynamic gating mechanisms be re-
purposed to learn meaningful vision-language
fusion patterns without explicit supervision?
(Subsection 3.3)
A: Yes, statistical analysis of our dynamic
gate’s outputs shows a strong correlation be-
tween branch selection and parts-of-speech,
as well as a weak correlation between branch
selection and concreteness and imageability
scores. (Section 5)
2. Q: If so, which linguistic phenomena do our
models prioritise visual information for, and
does this align with human word grounding?
A: We find that for parts-of-speech which
are open-class and tend to be more grounded
(adjective, noun, proper noun, verb) (Haley
et al., 2025), the dynamic gate assigns more
weight to visual signals than for function
words (conjunction, punctuation, symbols,
auxiliary verbs, particles) which tend to be
less grounded (Haley et al., 2025). (Section
5)
3. Q: Is the setup of the Vision track optimal
for multimodal learning? In particular, can
architectural mechanisms compensate for the
limited visual information provided by global
image embeddings? (Subsection 3.4)
A: In our framework, global image embed-
dings create an information bottleneck that
feature enhancements cannot fully address
(Subsection 4.2).
Moreover, we find that
the split between text-only and image-caption
data causes training instability and identify
misalignments between the training data and
multiple evaluation benchmarks. (Section 6)
4. Q: Do contrastive learning auxiliary objec-
tives help or hinder small vision-language
models under significant data constraints?
(Subsection 3.5)
A: Contrastive learning objectives prove coun-
terproductive without sufficient scale for our
selected benchmarks. (Subsection 4.3)
Performance analysis on five BabyLM Chal-
lenge benchmarks (BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020),
BLiMP Supplement (Warstadt et al., 2025), EWoK
(Ivanova et al., 2024), Winoground (Thrush et al.,
2022) and VQA (Goyal et al., 2017)) reveals task-
specific benefits of our proposed framework, with
our base model achieving competitive or superior
performance compared to the multimodal baselines
of the 2025 Challenge.
Overall, this work contributes to the broader goal
of taking inspiration from human learning for the
development of language models, not just in terms
of data, but also in their underlying mechanisms.
While the results of dynamic gating show that archi-
tectural design can lead to meaningful patterns, our
findings also reveal which constraints (visual rep-
resentation, data curriculum, training datasets and
evaluation benchmarks) must be addressed next in
order to further improve vision-language models
based on human learning.
2
Background
2.1
Vision-Language Models
Vision-language models (VLMs) combine an im-
age encoder and (optionally) a text encoder with
a multimodal fusion module to learn joint repre-
sentations for tasks such as captioning, retrieval,
and visual question-answering. Although specific
VLM architectures vary, most share a vision en-
coder projecting images into embedding features
aligned with language model embeddings, often
implemented as a Vision Transformer (ViT) patch
encoder pre-trained on rich visual datasets (Doso-
vitskiy et al., 2021), and a text encoder. While
early VLMs (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and
ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021)) use both vision and text
encoders trained jointly using contrastive learning
to align visual and textual representation in a shared
latent space (Li et al., 2025), more recent models
such as LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023) no longer employ
a separate text encoder, but simply use a visual
encoder with a text decoder.
2.1.1
GIT and Flamingo Baselines
The baselines used in the Vision track are the
Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) and the Genera-
tive Image-to-text Transformer (GIT) (Wang et al.,
2022) vision-language models.
The GIT (Wang et al., 2022) architecture con-
sists of an image encoder and a text decoder. The
image encoder is pre-trained using a contrastive
learning objective, and outputs visual features that
are linearly projected and concatenated with em-
bedded text tokens to form the input to the decoder.
193

The entire model is trained using next token predic-
tion, where each token is predicted based on both
the preceding text tokens and the visual features.
Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022) is a decoder-
based multimodal model that interleaves text de-
coder layers with gated cross-attention dense
blocks that incorporate visual input. An image
encoder extracts visual features, which a Perceiver
Resampler module (Jaegle et al., 2021) compresses
into a fixed number of tokens per image. These
serve as keys and queries in the gated cross-
attention dense layers inserted between language
model blocks, where a tahn-gated learnable scalar
scales each cross-attention and feed-forward sub-
layer to control the flow of visual information. The
model is trained with next token prediction.
Last year’s submissions to the BabyLM Chal-
lenge Vision track did not beat the Flamingo and
GIT baselines (Hu et al., 2024). AlKhamissi et al.
(2024) proposed a self-synthesis strategy for train-
ing a BabyLLaMA (Timiryasov and Tastet, 2023)
model, comprising four phases ranging from ba-
sic language skills to cognitive tasks. Saha et al.
(2024) evaluated the effect of curriculum learning
on GIT and Flamingo, concluding that benefits
were architecture-, training- and task-dependent.
Klerings et al. (2024) investigated the role of visual
data in language learning for the GIT architecture,
finding that visual training data improves model
performance on multimodal benchmarks but has
no effect on text-only benchmarks. Moreover, they
analysed task-specific neuron usage and concluded
that their models are highly modular, with visual
inputs influencing which components the model
uses to process the same text input.
We hypothesise that the GIT and Flamingo mod-
els, originally proposed for large-scale training,
lack explicit cognitive motivation and may under-
perform when scaled down, prompting the im-
plementation of our architecture. We point out
that our dynamic gating approach contrasts with
Flamingo’s gated cross-attention dense blocks as
follows: firstly, Flamingo applies uniform layer-
wise gating parameters across all tokens, whereas
our dynamic gate adapts based on individual tokens.
Secondly, our model consistently injects visual fea-
tures at every decoding layer, while Flamingo intro-
duces visual information every few layers, which
could limit the model’s ability to learn a stable
textual representation.
It is worth noting that the 2024 Challenge did not
impose a limit on the number of training epochs,
and that the 2024 Flamingo and GIT baselines were
trained on 20 epochs worth of text-only data and
potentially up to 80 epochs worth of image-caption
data. Similarly, the 2025 baselines were trained us-
ing a 1:4 ratio between text-only and image-caption
data, while respecting the 10-epoch training limit.
2.2
Token-Level Integration of Visual and
Linguistic Information
In this work, we ask whether dynamically weight-
ing different modalities can be used to improve next
token selection in autoregressive models. Wang
et al. (2018) and Kiela et al. (2018) asked a similar
question about how to dynamically weight linguis-
tic and visual input based on word type. However,
their goal was to create static word embeddings re-
lying on weak supervision. In contrast, we propose
using dynamic gating as an unsupervised mecha-
nism during autoregressive generation, where the
model decides at each step which modality should
produce the next token.
It has been shown in cognitive science research
that concrete and abstract words are differentiated
in human processing (Binder et al., 2005). Wang
et al. (2010) found that abstract words primarily
activate language-related brain regions, whereas
concrete words engage perceptual brain areas. Fur-
ther work showed that functional Magnetic Res-
onance Imaging patterns for concrete nouns can
be decoded by both linguistic and visual represen-
tations (Anderson et al., 2017), but that abstract
nouns are only decodable via linguistic representa-
tions (Wang et al., 2018).
An advantage has been reported for words
judged to be more concrete than those judged to
be more abstract in the learning of distributed se-
mantic representations (Bruni et al., 2014; Hill and
Korhonen, 2014). This means that language models
are likely to perform better on benchmarks contain-
ing more concrete words (Pezzelle et al., 2021).
As Kiela et al. (2018) observe, there are complex
interactions between concreteness and other fac-
tors such as word frequency and word class. We
examine concreteness and word class separately in
this work and leave the study of their interaction,
along with word frequency, for future work.
3
Method
3.1
Overview
We present a multimodal framework for the
BabyLM Vision track that learns language from
194

both ungrounded and visually-grounded text data.
We assume that the training data and number of
training epochs are fixed according to the con-
straints of the BabyLM Challenge 2025, while
the architecture and training regime are variables
which we aim to optimise. Specifically, we de-
velop a dual-stream transformer architecture
with three key innovations that aim to mirror hu-
man language processing and improve model per-
formance under Challenge constraints:
1. Cognitive alignment through dynamic gat-
ing: Unlike standard vision-language models
that use uniform fusion strategies, we imple-
ment a token-wise dynamic gating mechanism
with four variants exploring different granu-
larities and decision levels. This mechanism
learns to adaptively weight visual versus lin-
guistic information for each token, drawing
inspiration from how humans selectively inte-
grate multimodal information.
2. Maximising limited visual information:
Given the constraint of using only a global im-
age embedding during training, we implement
multiple strategies to compensate for limited
visual information. These include modula-
tion techniques that dynamically transform
features based on cross-modal context, and
channel attention to identify salient aspects
within the limited visual representation.
3. Visual grounding via auxiliary objective
functions: we explore two auxiliary objective
functions to enhance visual grounding in our
framework: (1) a contrastive learning objec-
tive (Radford et al., 2021) which aligns entire
captions with images at the sentence level, and
(2) LexiContrastive Grounding (Zhuang et al.,
2024), which performs word-level alignment
between individual tokens and images. These
auxiliary objectives aim to improve language
learning by creating stronger associations be-
tween linguistic and visual representations.
3.2
Base Architecture
At the core of our framework, we design an au-
toregressive dual stream transformer drawing in-
spiration from the architecture of state-of-the-art
vision-language models such as LLaVA (Liu et al.,
2023) and QWen-VL (Bai et al., 2023). A sim-
plified illustration of our architecture is shown in
Figure 1.
The architecture consists of four main compo-
nents: (1) a text processing stream that uses
standard decoder layers with learned embeddings
and positional encodings to process both text-only
data and image captions; (2) an image processing
stream that takes DINOv2 embeddings as input,
projects them into the model’s hidden space and re-
fines them with additional transformer encoder lay-
ers for empirical performance, future patch-token
compatibility and computational efficiency (details
in Appendix I); (3) a multimodal decoder inte-
grates text and image features using three sequen-
tial mechanisms: masked self-attention applied to
the text features, followed by cross-attention fusion
between text and image features (when available),
and dynamic gating that adaptively determines how
much to rely on visual versus linguistic information
for each token; (4) an output projection layer that
maps the decoder outputs back to the vocabulary
space for next token prediction.
3.3
Dynamic Gating
While dynamic gating in multimodal AI has primar-
ily focused on classification tasks, demonstrating
improved robustness and computational efficiency
(Xue and Marculescu, 2023; Wang and Wang,
2024; Xie and Zhang, 2020), we ask whether this
idea can be repurposed as a cognitively-motivated
mechanism for token selection in multimodal au-
toregressive models.
Our approach is hypothesis-driven. Dynamic
gating has proven effective in other multimodal
settings, and large vision-language models appear
to exhibit implicit gating capabilities through at-
tention patterns learned at scale.
We therefore
ask: does introducing an explicit token-wise gat-
ing mechanism help smaller, data-efficient models
achieve similar selective integration more reliably?
Our hypothesis is therefore as follows: just as
human language processing selectively integrates
visual information, for example, relying heavily on
visual inputs for concrete, perceptual words (e.g.,
“dog", “red") while defaulting to linguistic knowl-
edge for abstract terms (e.g., “therefore", “impos-
sible"), a token-wise dynamic gating mechanism
could teach a model to make similar fine-grained
fusion decisions. By conditioning each gate on
both the current text hidden state and the cross-
attention features, the model can learn to amplify
the vision input when it truly informs the next word
and ignore it when it does not.
We implement four variants of a dynamic gating
195

mechanism, varying along two axes: (1) granu-
larity, whether the gate is computed per feature or
per token, and (2) soft vs hard, whether the gate
outputs continuous weights or discrete decisions.
The granularity axis investigates whether differ-
ent tokens require different subsets of visual fea-
tures (e.g., colour features for “red", spatial features
for “above") or whether coarse per-token gating is
sufficient. The soft vs hard gating axis examines
whether binary selection or continuous weighting
of features yields more interpretable fusion patterns
and better performance.
More specifically, the four gating variants com-
pute gating weights g to dynamically fuse text and
cross-attention representations via
hfused = g ⊙htext + (1 −g) ⊙hcrossAttn
(1)
and differ in whether g operates per feature or per
token and makes continuous or discrete selections.
The technical implementation details for the four
gating variants are available in Appendix A.
3.4
Feature Representation
The BabyLM Challenge provides the images in the
training data as single global embeddings. While
computationally efficient, this approach limits the
spatial visual information available to the model.
Traditional vision-language models benefit from
patch token representations that preserve spatial
information and enable fine-grained visual ground-
ing (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Therefore, the next
aspects we investigate in this work are methods of
maximising the utility of the global image tokens
provided in the Challenge.
We explore two complementary modulation tech-
niques, FiLM (Perez et al., 2018) and DyIntra
(Gao et al., 2019), which dynamically reshape
one set of features based on another, as well as
a global channel-attention enhancement. These
approaches target different aspects of the represen-
tation bottleneck: modulation techniques address
cross-modal feature interaction, while channel at-
tention addresses intra-modal feature refinement.
While the dynamic gating mechanism deter-
mines how much information to incorporate from
each modality, FiLM and DyIntra determine how
that information should be transformed, and a chan-
nel attention mechanism determines what is mean-
ingful within the image features.
We evaluate these methods at several integration
points within our architecture to determine which
approach most effectively compensates for the lack
of spatial visual information.
The technical details of our implementations are
available in Appendix B.
3.5
Auxiliary Objective Functions
As previous work in vision-language models sug-
gests (Lu et al., 2020), a multi-task objective can
improve model performance. In this work, we ex-
plore training our models using two auxiliary func-
tions, Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
(CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021) and LexiContrastive
Grounding (LCG) (Zhuang et al., 2024). Both func-
tions aim to ground textual representations in vi-
sual concepts through contrastive learning, creat-
ing a shared embedding space where semantically
related image-text pairs are positioned closer to-
gether. However, they operate at different levels of
granularity: CLIP aligns entire captions with their
corresponding images at the sentence level, while
LCG performs alignment at the word level between
individual tokens and images.
Recent research shows that visual grounding at
both sentence and word levels can improve word ac-
quisition in low-data regimes (Zhuang et al., 2023).
A CLIP objective could capture global associations
that support contextual understanding, while an
LCG objective might reflect fine-grained grounded
learning. However, as we discuss in the results sec-
tion (Section 4.3), the effectiveness of these aux-
iliary objectives significantly depends on various
factors, including the visual representation format,
batch size and training data.
The technical details of each auxiliary objective
function are available in Section C.
4
Results
To evaluate our framework, we select five of the
benchmarks proposed in the BabyLM Challenge:
BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020) and BLiMP Supple-
ment for grammar, EWoK (Ivanova et al., 2024)
for world knowledge, Winoground (Thrush et al.,
2022) for vision-linguistic compositional reason-
ing and VQA (Goyal et al., 2017) for image-based
question answering. For the first four we used the
2025 evaluation pipeline1, while for VQA we used
the 2024 repository2. A detailed description of
each benchmark is available in Appendix D.
1https://github.com/babylm/
evaluation-pipeline-2025
2https://github.com/babylm/
evaluation-pipeline-2024
196

Model
BLiMP
BLiMP
Supplement
EWoK
Winoground
VQA*
Baselines 2025
Flamingo (BabyLM Challenge 2025)
70.9
65.1
51
54.8
43.31
GIT (BabyLM Challenge 2025)
72.2
66.4
51.8
56.2
49.82
Baselines 2024
Flamingo (BabyLM Challenge 2024)
70.9
65.0
52.7
51.6
52.3
GIT (BabyLM Challenge 2024)
65.2
62.7
52.4
55.5
54.1
BabyLLaMA (AlKhamissi et al., 2024)
72.9
54.2
50.2
50.9
42.0
FlamingoCL T+C (Saha et al., 2024)
60.13
53.28
50.71
50.80
40.85
GITCL T+C (Saha et al., 2024)
64.05
51.24
50.98
55.23
43.98
GIT 1/0.25 (Klerings et al., 2024)
71.2
64.6
52.5
56.2
52.2
GIT 1/0.125 (Klerings et al., 2024)
66.3
61.7
52.3
57.0
52.6
Our framework
Base, soft gate per feature
74.33
56.36
50.81
51.61
50.02
Architectural features
Soft gate per token
73.86
55.43
51.56
52.14
48.39
Hard gate per feature
74.10
54.16
51.20
50.13
45.62
Hard gate per token
74.19
54.59
51.16
50.80
45.51
No gate
74.70
55.75
50.77
51.34
50.58
FiLM on text
74.32
55.10
50.61
53.49
46.04
FiLM on cross-attention
74.95
56.36
51.62
52.68
49.66
FiLM on image
73.80
54.59
51.06
50.13
17.92
DyIntra on text
74
56.97
51.73
51.47
47.16
DyIntra on cross-attention
73.68
56.68
51.57
53.22
48.87
DyIntra on image
74.69
56.57
51.28
50.00
45.61
Channel attention
74.24
54.23
51.15
51.15
49.15
Auxiliary objective functions
NTP + CLIP
72.28
54.35
51.45
51.47
47.72
NTP + LCG
70.27
56.91
49.74
50.00
36.62
Table 1: Performance of our base model and variants on five BabyLM Challenge benchmarks. Scores for our models
and 2025 baselines are computed using the 2025 evaluation pipeline (BLiMP, BLiMP-S, EWoK, Winoground) and
2024 pipeline (VQA). Green shading indicates performance above the 2025 baselines.
For all architectural features and training strate-
gies we define, we conduct experiments in the form
of ablation studies in order to evaluate each poten-
tial improvement in isolation. A summary of all
the experiments we define is available in Table 6.
We train all our models in the same conditions (as
described in Table 5) using the same model hy-
perparameters (summarised in Table 4), with the
exception of the auxiliary objective function, for
which we increase the batch size from 64 to 128 as
a larger batch size is recommended for contrastive
learning (Chen et al., 2020).
Our key observations from the complete set of
results (Table 1) are summarised below.
4.1
Baselines
Our framework achieves a higher score on
BLiMP (almost 4% higher than Flamingo and
over 2% higher than GIT) and competitive
scores for EWoK, Winoground and VQA. We
suggest that our base model outperforms Flamingo
and GIT on BLiMP due to architectural differences.
These include the clear separation between the text
and image streams and consistent fusion in our base
model. In our proposed architecture, the first de-
coder layer’s self-attention module processes only
textual input, whereas GIT concatenates the image
token(s) with the text input before they are fed into
the model, which could introduce noise when ex-
tracting linguistic signals. Our model consistently
integrates visual features at each decoding layer,
whereas Flamingo incorporates visual information
only at intermittent layers, which could affect the
model’s ability to learn a robust textual representa-
tion.
The lower performance of our model on BLiMP
Supplement is due to differences in training data.
As shown in Appendix F, the image–caption
dataset supports this benchmark far better than the
text-only dataset. This favours Flamingo and GIT,
trained with a 1:4 text-only/image–caption ratio
versus our 1:1 ratio. Winoground shows a simi-
lar trend, with baselines benefiting from more im-
age–caption training epochs.
4.2
Performance of Architectural Features
The dynamic gating modules maintain the per-
formance of our base model without gating on
197

BLiMP and BLiMP Supplement, bring modest
benefits for Winoground and show mixed re-
sults on VQA. As shown in Table 1, our dynamic
gating modules do not have a significant effect on
the model’s performance on BLiMP and BLiMP
Supplement, which is the desired outcome for the
text-only benchmarks. There is very little varia-
tion in the EWoK scores across the models, which
we attribute to a mismatch between training and
evaluation data and further discuss in Section 7.
The soft gate and hard gate per token models
outperform the no gate model on Winoground. We
hypothesise that the gating mechanism in these
models produces slightly cleaner, more discrimi-
native joint representations between images and
text, which in turn yields a small but consistent
improvement.
We observe limited performance benefits of the
gating modules on VQA, with the hard gate models
achieving a lower score (∼5% lower) compared
to the no gate variant. We hypothesise that the
hard gates may have learned to allow for stronger
image signals than is optimal for VQA, especially
since the image-captioning training set contains
few constructions similar to VQA (see Section 7).
Modulation and channel attention achieve
mixed results over the five benchmarks, under-
scoring that the global image embedding rep-
resents a performance bottleneck. Across the
seven variants we implement, no single feature
representation technique uniformly improves all
five benchmarks (Table 1). FiLM applied to tex-
tual representation and cross-attention, along with
DyIntra applied to cross-attention, shows modest
improvements on Winoground (+1.88%, +1.07%,
and +1.61% respectively) by potentially creating
more separable joint representations.
With varied impact, all techniques decrease the
performance of our base model on VQA. Never-
theless, the cross-attention modulation and our at-
tention seem to preserve most of the linguistic and
visual signals needed for VQA, while also bringing
slight improvements on Winoground. The results
collectively demonstrate that feature modulation
and channel attention techniques designed for rich
representations show limited and task-specific ben-
efits when applied to severely compressed represen-
tations. While certain combinations can enhance
performance on specific benchmarks, they cannot
overcome the information bottleneck caused by us-
ing only a global image embedding.
4.3
Performance of Auxiliary Objectives
A pure next token prediction objective function
achieves the best scores for our base model over-
all. There are multiple potential causes for these
results. First, the BLiMP benchmarks rely solely
on linguistic information, therefore any auxiliary
objective that competes with next token prediction
can dilute the model’s focus on linguistic signals.
This is reflected in the BLiMP score differences of
2.05% and 4.06% with the CLIP and LCG auxiliary
functions, respectively.
Second, the CLIP objective was designed for a
larger batch size than we could use with our com-
putational budget and more data than the available
samples in the image-caption dataset, which may
have led to a limited impact. Third, the global im-
age embeddings provide limited visual information,
which seems to be insufficient to enable the con-
trastive auxiliary objectives to make fine-grained
visual-linguistic alignments.
Fourth, the alternation between text-only and
image-caption epochs may cause training instabil-
ity, since the auxiliary functions are only used dur-
ing the image-caption epochs. Therefore, with a
10-epoch budget and the limited global image em-
beddings, there is no evident benefit of using con-
trastive learning auxiliary objectives for the bench-
marks we selected.
From a cognitive perspective, these negative re-
sults may align better with theories of human lan-
guage acquisition. Children do not learn language
through explicit contrastive mechanisms where
they simultaneously process what words do and do
not mean across hundreds of examples, but rather in
rich, multimodal contexts where meaning emerges
from use rather than from explicit positive or nega-
tive examples. These results support our focus on
architectural innovations, such as dynamic gating,
which better capture the adaptive nature of human
cognitive processing during language learning.
5
Interpretability
Figure 2 illustrates our model’s gate value for
next token prediction, aggregated per part-of-
speech (PoS). The model is evaluated on held-out
sentences from the Localized Narratives dataset,
amounting to 1,034 tokens. The parts-of-speech
for each sentence were extracted using the spaCy
English tagger (en_core_web_sm) (Honnibal et al.,
2020). The gate value plotted is the mean over the
gate values per feature. A lower score means the
198

Figure 2: Our base model’s aggregated gate values per
part-of-speech for next token prediction, based on the
Localized Narratives dataset. The parts-of-speech for
each sentence were extracted using the spaCy English
tagger (Honnibal et al., 2020). Lower values on the
y-axis mean that the model attended less to the pure
linguistic signals and more to the fused image-text rep-
resentation when predicting the next token.
model attended less to the pure linguistic signals
and more to the fused image-text representation
when predicting the next token.
There is an interpretable correlation between
gate selection and part-of-speech. For the parts-
of-speech which are open-class and generally more
grounded (adjective, noun, proper noun, verb) (Ha-
ley et al., 2025), the model attends more to the im-
age signals (left side of the plot), while for function
words (conjunction, punctuation, symbols, auxil-
iary verbs, particles) the model attends more to
the pure text. Furthermore, the model shows in-
creased visual grounding for numerals, determin-
ers and adpositions, suggesting they leverage vi-
sual information for counting and quantity (“two",
“three"), uniqueness (“a" vs “the"), spatial reference
(“this" vs “that") and spatial relationships (“on",
“in", “around"). We confirm the correlation between
gate selection and parts-of-speech by running the
Kruskal-Wallis statistical test (McKight and Najab,
2010), and obtaining (H = 154.91, p < 0.001).
We also find a statistically significant nega-
tive correlation between gate values and concrete-
ness (ρ = −0.139, p < 0.001) and imageability
(ρ = −0.153, p < 0.001) scores using the MRC
Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981) and
Spearman’s rank correlation test.
In Table 2, we illustrate the correlation be-
tween gate selection and concreteness by aggre-
gating the gate values and defining meaningful
categories based on score distributions from the
MRC database using cutpoints at mean ± 1 SD. As
shown, the correlation is weak (∣ρ∣< 0.2), and
the pattern is non-monotonic i.e., moderately ab-
stract/concrete words show higher gate rates than
the very abstract/concrete ones, suggesting that
other factors, such as part-of-speech, are more im-
portant in gating decisions. Similar results for im-
ageability are available in Appendix G.
Category
Gate Selection
Mean (SD)
# words
Very Abstract (<318)
0.427 (0.141) 420
Abstract (318-438)
0.471 (0.136) 82
Concrete (438-558)
0.391 (0.155) 80
Very Concrete (>558) 0.343 (0.139) 119 9
Categories defined as µ ± σ based on the MRC database.
SD = standard deviation.
Table 2: Mean gate value per concreteness bin for our
base model (incorporating a soft gate per feature).
6
Discussion
Missing modality problem. In our experiments,
we find that the split of the training data into text-
only and image-caption datasets introduces com-
plexity and instability during training. While we at-
tempt to mitigate this by alternating epochs, the ap-
proach still yields performance oscillations (details
in Appendices F and E). The BabyLM Challenge
baselines address this problem by pairing text-only
and image-caption in the same batch. However,
this results in training the models on four times
more image-caption samples than text-only sam-
ples. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, there
is no cognitive justification for this split.
Data Curriculum. We explore multiple data
curriculum strategies that could optimise learning
in our proposed framework. At a coarse-grained
level, we explore different orderings between text-
only and image-caption epochs. At a fine-grained
level, we explore how mixing text-only and image-
caption data within the same batch, either uni-
formly or non-uniformly, impacts the training dy-
namics and generalisation of the model. Empiri-
cal results suggest that alternating between image-
caption and text-only epochs is the best strategy
for our framework for the five benchmarks we se-
lected in this work. A comprehensive discussion
and results are available in Appendix E.
Future work. Based on the results and find-
ings in this work, for the BabyLM Challenge Vi-
sion track, we make several observations for future
199

work. First, the training dataset should be varied,
with high-quality text that covers a range of English
constructions. In particular, the training dataset
should cover constructions (e.g., images paired
with question-answers for VQA) and concepts (e.g.,
EWoK) present in the evaluation benchmarks. Sec-
ond, for training stability and improved language
acquisition, it may be more beneficial to train the
model on a completely multimodal dataset, which
is one promising avenue for future work. Third,
given the limitations that the global image token
introduced in this work, future work should use
patch-token representations for the image input in
order to enable richer multimodal learning – that
which is the aim of future iterations of this frame-
work. Finally, it would be interesting to develop
benchmarks that specifically reward cognitively-
plausible mechanisms: i.e., evaluating the cogni-
tive principles guiding the model’s responses.
7
Conclusion
In this work, we show that token-wise dynamic gat-
ing enables small vision-language models to adap-
tively integrate linguistic and visual cues, yield-
ing interpretable patterns and competitive perfor-
mance under the BabyLM Challenge Vision track
constraints. Our results highlight the promise of
cognitively-inspired architectural design, while un-
derscoring the need to address limitations in visual
representation, training data and evaluation bench-
marks to realise the full potential of multimodal
learning in low-resource settings.
Limitations
Due to computational constraints, we could not use
a larger batch size, which would have benefited
the models trained with a contrastive loss objective
(Chen et al., 2020).
Two of the BabyLM Challenge benchmarks we
used in this work showed limitations in evaluating
our multimodal models, which potentially stem
from a mismatch with the training data.
Throughout our experiments, we find that EWoK
demonstrates no sensitivity to changes in architec-
ture or training strategy, with performance remain-
ing around 50% regardless of the experiment con-
ditions. We therefore investigate the frequency of
concepts tested by EWoK in the BabyLM Chal-
lenge training data, as previous research suggests
that language models rely on frequency more than
children do in word acquisition (Chang and Bergen,
2022). A Regular Expression match for the con-
cepts tested in EWoK over the training data re-
vealed that in 37.69% of the EWoK examples, at
least one out of two concepts tested appears fewer
than 100 times in the training data, with 13% of test
examples having both concepts appearing 0 times.
Therefore, we conclude that the training dataset
does not properly support EWoK evaluation.
By alternating between image-caption and text-
only epoch, we also find score differences be-
tween epoch types for VQA (details in Appendix
F). Our results suggest that VQA depends signif-
icantly on the presence of question-answer and
turn-taking formats in the training dataset. This
finding aligns with observations by Laurençon et al.
(2024), who note that vision-language models typi-
cally only learn visual question answering during
fine-tuning stages, not during pre-training, unless
they are explicitly exposed to data following the
VQA format. This is particularly problematic under
the constraints of the BabyLM Challenge, where
no fine-tuning stage exists, forcing models to ac-
quire question-answering capabilities just from pre-
training data that lacks examples similar to the
VQA task.
As a general observation, training vision-
language BabyLMs differs from training state-of-
the-art large vision-language models, which rely
on large pre-trained components. Moreover, VLMs
can undergo multiple training stages where com-
ponents are selectively frozen or unfrozen, higher-
quality data is gradually introduced and the image
resolution is progressively increased (Laurençon
et al., 2024). With limited data and a maximum of
just 10 training epochs under the BabyLM Chal-
lenge constraints, implementing multi-stage train-
ing strategies becomes significantly more difficult.
Acknowledgments
This paper reports on work supported by Cam-
bridge University Press & Assessment.
It was
performed using resources provided by the Cam-
bridge Service for Data Driven Discovery (CSD3)
operated by the University of Cambridge Research
Computing Service, provided by Dell EMC and
Intel using Tier-2 funding from the Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council (capital
grant EP/T022159/1), and DiRAC funding from
the Science and Technology Facilities Council. We
also particularly thank Dr Diana Galvan-Sosa.
200

References
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc,
Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm
Reynolds, and 1 others. 2022. Flamingo: a visual
language model for few-shot learning. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 35:23716–
23736.
Badr AlKhamissi, Yingtian Tang, Abdülkadir Gökce, Jo-
hannes Mehrer, and Martin Schrimpf. 2024. Dream-
ing Out Loud: A Self-Synthesis Approach For Train-
ing Vision-Language Models With Developmentally
Plausible Data. In The 2nd BabyLM Challenge at
the 28th Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 244–251, Miami, FL, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Andrew J Anderson, Douwe Kiela, Stephen Clark, and
Massimo Poesio. 2017. Visually grounded and tex-
tual semantic models differentially decode brain ac-
tivity associated with concrete and abstract nouns.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 5:17–30.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang,
Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou,
and Jingren Zhou. 2023.
Qwen-VL: A Versa-
tile Vision-Language Model for Understanding, Lo-
calization, Text Reading, and Beyond.
Preprint,
arXiv:2308.12966.
Jeffrey R Binder, Chris F Westbury, Kristen A McK-
iernan, Edward T Possing, and David A Medler. 2005.
Distinct brain systems for processing concrete and ab-
stract concepts. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
17:905–917.
Elia Bruni, Nam-Khanh Tran, and Marco Baroni. 2014.
Multimodal distributional semantics. Journal of Arti-
ficial Intelligence Research, 49:1–47.
Tyler A Chang and Benjamin K Bergen. 2022. Word ac-
quisition in neural language models. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:1–
16.
Lucas Charpentier, Leshem Choshen, Ryan Cotterell,
Mustafa Omer Gul, Michael Hu, Jaap Jumelet, Tal
Linzen, Jing Liu, Aaron Mueller, Candace Ross, and
1 others. 2025. BabyLM Turns 3: Call for papers
for the 2025 BabyLM workshop.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.10645.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and
Geoffrey Hinton. 2020. A simple framework for
contrastive learning of visual representations. In In-
ternational conference on machine learning, pages
1597–1607. PmLR.
Leshem Choshen, Ryan Cotterell, Michael Y Hu,
Tal Linzen, Aaron Mueller, Candace Ross, Alex
Warstadt, Ethan Wilcox, Adina Williams, and
Chengxu Zhuang. 2024. [call for papers] The 2nd
BabyLM Challenge: Sample-efficient pretraining on
a developmentally plausible corpus. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.06214.
Max Coltheart. 1981.
The MRC psycholinguistic
database. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology Section A, 33(4):497–505.
Alexey
Dosovitskiy,
Lucas
Beyer,
Alexander
Kolesnikov,
Dirk Weissenborn,
Xiaohua Zhai,
Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias
Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob
Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. 2021.
An image
is worth 16x16 words:
Transformers for image
recognition at scale. In Proceedings of the Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR).
Peng Gao, Zhengkai Jiang, Haoxuan You, Pan Lu,
Steven CH Hoi, Xiaogang Wang, and Hongsheng Li.
2019. Dynamic fusion with intra-and inter-modality
attention flow for visual question answering. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 6639–6648.
Martin Gerlach and Francesc Font-Clos. 2020. A stan-
dardized Project Gutenberg corpus for statistical anal-
ysis of natural language and quantitative linguistics.
Entropy, 22(1):126.
Jill Gilkerson, Jeffrey A Richards, Steven F Warren, Ju-
dith K Montgomery, Charles R Greenwood, D Kim-
brough Oller, John HL Hansen, and Terrance D Paul.
2017. Mapping the early language environment using
all-day recordings and automated analysis. American
journal of speech-language pathology, 26(2):248–
265.
Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv
Batra, and Devi Parikh. 2017. Making the v in vqa
matter: Elevating the role of image understanding
in visual question answering. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 6904–6913.
Coleman Haley, Sharon Goldwater, and Edoardo Ponti.
2025. A grounded typology of word classes. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of
the Americas Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 10380–10399, Al-
buquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. 2016.
Gaus-
sian error linear units (gelus).
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.08415.
Felix Hill and Anna Korhonen. 2014. Learning Abstract
Concept Embeddings from Multi-Modal Data: Since
You Probably Can’t See What I Mean. In Proceed-
ings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 255–
265, Doha, Qatar. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
201

Matthew Honnibal, Ines Montani, Sofie Van Lan-
deghem, Adriane Boyd, and 1 others. 2020. spaCy:
Industrial-strength natural language processing in
python.
Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun. 2018. Squeeze-and-
excitation networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 7132–7141.
Michael Y. Hu, Aaron Mueller, Candace Ross, Adina
Williams, Tal Linzen, Chengxu Zhuang, Leshem
Choshen, Ryan Cotterell, Alex Warstadt, and
Ethan Gotlieb Wilcox, editors. 2024.
The 2nd
BabyLM Challenge at the 28th Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Miami, FL, USA.
Sagar Imambi, Kolla Bhanu Prakash, and GR Kana-
gachidambaresan. 2021. PyTorch. Programming
with TensorFlow: solution for edge computing appli-
cations, pages 87–104.
Anna A Ivanova, Aalok Sathe, Benjamin Lipkin, Un-
nathi Kumar, Setayesh Radkani, Thomas H Clark,
Carina Kauf, Jennifer Hu, RT Pramod, Gabriel Grand,
and 1 others. 2024. Elements of World Knowledge
(EWOK): A cognition-inspired framework for eval-
uating basic world knowledge in language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09605.
Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andy Brock, Oriol
Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Joao Carreira. 2021.
Perceiver: General perception with iterative atten-
tion. In International conference on machine learn-
ing, pages 4651–4664. PMLR.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. 2016. Categori-
cal reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.01144.
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana
Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Zhen
Li, and Tom Duerig. 2021. Scaling up visual and
vision-language representation learning with noisy
text supervision. In International conference on ma-
chine learning, pages 4904–4916. PMLR.
Dilay Z Karadöller, Beyza Sümer, and Aslı Özyürek.
2024. First-language acquisition in a multimodal lan-
guage framework: Insights from speech, gesture, and
sign. First Language, page 01427237241290678.
Douwe Kiela, Changhan Wang, and Kyunghyun Cho.
2018. Dynamic Meta-Embeddings for Improved Sen-
tence Representations. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 1466–1477, Brussels, Bel-
gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alina Klerings, Christian Bartelt, and Aaron Mueller.
2024. Developmentally Plausible Multimodal Lan-
guage Models Are Highly Modular.
In The 2nd
BabyLM Challenge at the 28th Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 118–
139, Miami, FL, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Alldrin, Jasper Ui-
jlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Shahab Kamali,
Stefan Popov, Matteo Malloci, Alexander Kolesnikov,
and 1 others. 2020. The open images dataset v4: Uni-
fied image classification, object detection, and visual
relationship detection at scale. International journal
of computer vision, 128(7):1956–1981.
Hugo Laurençon, Andrés Marafioti, Victor Sanh, and
Léo Tronchon. 2024. Building and better understand-
ing vision-language models: insights and future direc-
tions. In Workshop on Responsibly Building the Next
Generation of Multimodal Foundational Models.
Zongxia Li, Xiyang Wu, Hongyang Du, Huy Nghiem,
and Guangyao Shi. 2025. Benchmark evaluations,
applications, and challenges of large vision language
models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.02189,
1.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár,
and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014.
Microsoft coco:
Common objects in context. In Computer vision–
ECCV 2014: 13th European conference, zurich,
Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, proceedings,
part v 13, pages 740–755. Springer.
Pierre Lison and Jörg Tiedemann. 2016. OpenSubti-
tles2016: Extracting Large Parallel Corpora from
Movie and TV Subtitles. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’16), pages 923–929, Portorož,
Slovenia. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae
Lee. 2023. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 36:34892–
34916.
Jiasen Lu, Vedanuj Goswami, Marcus Rohrbach, Devi
Parikh, and Stefan Lee. 2020. 12-in-1: Multi-task
vision and language representation learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 10437–10446.
Brian MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES project: The
database, volume 2. Psychology Press.
Patrick E McKight and Julius Najab. 2010. Kruskal-
wallis test. The corsini encyclopedia of psychology,
pages 1–1.
Aliyah Morgenstern. 2014. Children’s multimodal lan-
guage development. Manual of language acquisition,
2:123–142.
Aliyah Morgenstern. 2023.
Children’s multimodal
language development from an interactional, usage-
based, and cognitive perspective. Wiley Interdisci-
plinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 14(2):e1631.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. 2018.
Representation learning with contrastive predictive
coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748.
202

Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni,
Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fer-
nandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin
El-Nouby, and 1 others. 2023. Dinov2: Learning
robust visual features without supervision. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.07193.
Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent
Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. 2018. Film: Vi-
sual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial in-
telligence, volume 32.
Sandro Pezzelle, Ece Takmaz, and Raquel Fernández.
2021. Word Representation Learning in Multimodal
Pre-Trained Transformers: An Intrinsic Evaluation.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 9:1563–1579.
Jordi Pont-Tuset, Jasper Uijlings, Soravit Changpinyo,
Radu Soricut, and Vittorio Ferrari. 2020. Connect-
ing vision and language with localized narratives.
In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Pro-
ceedings, Part V 16, pages 647–664. Springer.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-
try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, and
1 others. 2021. Learning transferable visual models
from natural language supervision. In International
conference on machine learning, pages 8748–8763.
PmLR.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, and 1 others. 2019.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learn-
ers. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9.
Susan A Rose, Judith F Feldman, and Jeffery J
Jankowski. 2009. A cognitive approach to the de-
velopment of early language. Child development,
80(1):134–150.
Rohan Saha, Abrar Fahim, Alona Fyshe, and Alex
Murphy. 2024. Exploring Curriculum Learning for
Vision-Language Tasks: A Study on Small-Scale
Multimodal Training. In The 2nd BabyLM Chal-
lenge at the 28th Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning, pages 65–81, Miami, FL,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and
Radu Soricut. 2018. Conceptual captions: A cleaned,
hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic im-
age captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2556–2565.
Andreas Stolcke, Klaus Ries, Noah Coccaro, Eliza-
beth Shriberg, Rebecca Bates, Daniel Jurafsky, Paul
Taylor, Rachel Martin, Carol Van Ess-Dykema, and
Marie Meteer. 2000. Dialogue act modeling for au-
tomatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Computational linguistics, 26(3):339–373.
Sho Takase, Shun Kiyono, Sosuke Kobayashi, and Jun
Suzuki. 2022. B2t connection: Serving stability and
performance in deep transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.00330.
Tristan Thrush, Ryan Jiang, Max Bartolo, Amanpreet
Singh, Adina Williams, Douwe Kiela, and Candace
Ross. 2022. Winoground: Probing vision and lan-
guage models for visio-linguistic compositionality.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5238–
5248.
Inar Timiryasov and Jean-Loup Tastet. 2023. Baby
llama: knowledge distillation from an ensemble of
teachers trained on a small dataset with no perfor-
mance penalty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02019.
Jianfeng Wang, Zhengyuan Yang, Xiaowei Hu, Linjie
Li, Kevin Lin, Zhe Gan, Zicheng Liu, Ce Liu, and
Lijuan Wang. 2022. Git: A generative image-to-text
transformer for vision and language. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.14100.
Jing Wang, Julie A Conder, David N Blitzer, and Svet-
lana V Shinkareva. 2010.
Neural representation
of abstract and concrete concepts: A meta-analysis
of neuroimaging studies. Human brain mapping,
31(10):1459–1468.
Nan Wang and Qi Wang. 2024. Dynamic Weighted Gat-
ing for Enhanced Cross-Modal Interaction in Mul-
timodal Sentiment Analysis. ACM Transactions on
Multimedia Computing, Communications and Appli-
cations, 21(1):1–19.
Shaonan Wang, Jiajun Zhang, and Chengqing Zong.
2018. Learning multimodal word representation via
dynamic fusion methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI
conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32.
Alex Warstadt, Leshem Choshen, Aaron Mueller, Adina
Williams, Ethan Wilcox, and Chengxu Zhuang. 2023.
Call for Papers – the BabyLM Challenge: Sample-
efficient pretraining on a developmentally plausible
corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11796.
Alex Warstadt, Aaron Mueller, Leshem Choshen, Ethan
Wilcox, Chengxu Zhuang, Juan Ciro, Rafael Mos-
quera, Bhargavi Paranjape, Adina Williams, Tal
Linzen, and 1 others. 2025.
Findings of the
BabyLM challenge: Sample-efficient pretraining on
developmentally plausible corpora. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.08165.
Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mo-
hananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R
Bowman. 2020. BLiMP: The benchmark of linguis-
tic minimal pairs for English. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:377–
392.
Long-Fei Xie and Xu-Yao Zhang. 2020. Gate-fusion
transformer for multimodal sentiment analysis. In
International Conference on Pattern Recognition and
Artificial Intelligence, pages 28–40. Springer.
203

Zihui Xue and Radu Marculescu. 2023. Dynamic mul-
timodal fusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, pages 2575–2584.
Chengxu Zhuang, Evelina Fedorenko, and Jacob An-
dreas. 2023.
Visual grounding helps learn word
meanings in low-data regimes.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.13257.
Chengxu Zhuang, Evelina Fedorenko, and Jacob An-
dreas. 2024.
Lexicon-Level Contrastive Visual-
Grounding Improves Language Modeling.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.14551.
…
…
…
…
…
…
Textual 
Representation
Cross-attention 
Representation
Soft Gate per Feature
Soft Gate per Token
Hard Gate per Feature
Hard Gate per Token
Gate
Figure 3: Conceptual output of different gating strate-
gies for fusing textual and cross-attention representa-
tions. Each rectangular box represents a token, with the
cells within representing dimensions. Red represents
textual features, green represents cross-attention fea-
tures and mixed colours represent fused features. Soft
gates apply continuous weights, while hard gates make
binary decisions, either per-feature (each dimension in-
dependently) or per-token (all dimensions together).
A
Dynamic Gating
We define four dynamic gating variants that operate
at different granularity and decision levels: soft
gate per feature, soft gate per token, hard gate per
feature, hard gate per token.
Input and Output. All four versions of the dy-
namic gate have the same input and output. Let
htext ∈RB×T×dmodel be the text hidden states af-
ter self-attention and hcrossAttn ∈RB×T×dmodel be
the output of the cross-attention between text and
image, where B is the batch size and T is the se-
quence length. Then, the input to the dynamic gate
is the concatenation of two hidden representations,
[htext; hcrossAttn] ∈RB×T×2dmodel. The output is
represented by hfused ∈RB×T×dmodel, which com-
bined the pure linguistic representation with the
visually-enriched representation based on the gat-
ing weights. In the case of a text-only input to the
model, the dynamic gate module is skipped, and
htext flows directly through the residual connection.
Figure 3 illustrates the conceptual output for
each type of gate.
A.1
Soft Gate per Feature
This variant computes a continuous weight for each
feature dimension i ∈{0, ..., dmodel −1} using the
sigmoid function. Concretely, the gate vector is
computed as:
g = σ(Linear [ htext; hcrossAttn ])∈[0, 1]B×T×dmodel
(2)
204

The dynamically fused representation is then
calculated as:
hfused = g ⊙htext + (1 −g) ⊙hcrossAttn
(3)
We use this variant of dynamic gating in the base
model.
A.2
Soft Gate per Token
The soft gate per token calculates a single continu-
ous weight (a scalar), which we apply to all features
in the hidden representations:
g = σ(Linear([ htext; hcrossAttn])) ∈[0, 1]B×T×1,
hfused = g ⊙htext + (1 −g) ⊙hcrossAttn
(4)
A.3
Hard Gate per Feature
Drawing inspiration from Xue and Marculescu
(2023), we extend the soft gating variants to a hard
selection mechanism using the Gumble-Softmax
reparametrisation trick (Jang et al., 2016).
The hard gate per feature variant enforces each
dimension to choose completely between linguistic
or visually-enriched representations. We first com-
pute a 2-way discrete choice for the two hidden
representations using a linear layer:
g=Linear([ htext; hcrossAttn ])∈[0, 1]B×T×dmodel×2
(5)
Each pair of logits (lb,t,i,0, lb,t,i,1) corresponds
to the scores for “use htext" versus “use hcrossAttn"
for feature i at position (b, t). A straightforward
hard gate would then be:
gb,t,i = arg max(lb,t,i,0, lb,t,i,1)
(6)
However, since g is a one-hot vector, it is not
differentiable. Therefore we employ a soft gate
˜g during training using Gumble-Softmax, similar
to Xue and Marculescu (2023), to enable back-
propagation:
˜lb,t,i,j = lb,t,i,j + zb,t,i,j
τ
, zb,t,i,j ∼Gumbel(0, 1)
(7)
where τ is the Softmax temperature. We then
apply Softmax over the two classes and select the
probability corresponding to htext as the soft gate:
yb,t,i,j =
exp(˜lb,t,i,j)
∑1
k=0 exp(˜lb,t,i,k)
, y∈[0, 1]B×T×dmodel×2
(8)
˜gb,t,i = yb,t,i,0, ˜g ∈[0, 1]B×T×dmodel
(9)
hfused is then be computed as:
hfused = ˜g ⊙htext + (1 −˜g) ⊙hcrossAttn
(10)
During training, we anneal the Softmax tempera-
ture τ from 1.0 to 0.1 over 80% of the training steps
of an image-caption epoch, gradually transitioning
from soft to nearly discrete selection. During infer-
ence, we convert ˜g to a true one-hot gate g using
arg max.
A.4
Hard Gate per Token
In the per token variant of the hard gate, we col-
lapse the feature-wise gate into a single binary de-
cision. The calculations, training and inference
remain the same as in subsection A.3, yet the shape
of the parameters changes. The summary of the
calculations in this variant is as follows:
l = Linear([ htext; hcrossAttn]) ∈RB×T×2 (11)
y = GumbelSoftmax(l, τ) ∈RB×T×2
(12)
˜gb,t = yb,t,0 ∈[0, 1]
(13)
hfused = ˜g ⊙htext + (1 −˜g) ⊙hcrossAttn
(14)
where the scalar ˜g is broadcasted over all dmodel
features.
B
Feature Representation
B.1
Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM)
To address the limited representational capacity
of a single image token, we incorporate Feature-
wise Linear Modulation (FiLM) (Perez et al.,
2018) as an intra-modal conditioning mechanism.
FiLM modulates neural network features through
a feature-wise affine transformation, enabling one
modality or context to dynamically influence an-
other. Specifically, it applies scaling and shifting
to a feature map based on a conditioning input,
and can be easily implemented in transformers as
follows:
Let hm1, hm2 ∈RB×T×dmodel be hidden state
feature representations with m1 indicating the pri-
mary features and m2 the conditioning features,
m1 ≠m2. Then,
FiLM(hm1, hm2) = γ ⊙hm1 + β
(15)
where γ, β ∈RB×T×dmodel are scaling and shifting
parameters predicted by linear layers from hm2.
205

B.2
Dynamic Intra Modulation (DyIntra)
Alternatively to FiLM, we explore the DyIntra mod-
ule proposed in (Gao et al., 2019), a scaling mech-
anism that modulates primary features using condi-
tioning features via a simple gating mask. DyIntra
predicts a positive-only gain for each representa-
tion, allowing it to boost its own hidden features
based on cross-modal context without shifting.
Formally, let hm1, hm2 ∈RB×T×dmodel be hidden
state feature representations, m1 ≠m2. Then,
DyIntra computes:
m = σ(Linear(hm2)) ∈[0, 1]B×T×dmodel
(16)
DyIntra(hm1, hm2) = (1 + m) ⊙hm1
(17)
Choosing m1 and m2.
There are several points
in our base model where we could integrate a FiLM
or DyIntra modulation module. We evaluate and
motivate three such choices as follows:
1. m1 = self-attention (output), m2 = image:
modulating the text self-attention output with
visual features may allow the model to adjust
how text tokens relate to each other based on
visual context;
2. m1=cross-attention (output), m2 = image:
modulating cross-attention features with the
original image may refine the vision-language
fusion by emphasising features that align with
the global visual representation;
3. m1 = image, m2 = text: modulating image
features based on textual context may allow
the model to dynamically highlight relevant
visual information for the current linguistic
processing needs.
B.3
Channel Attention
To implement channel attention for only one im-
age token, we use the Excitation formula from the
Squeeze-and-Excitation method (Hu et al., 2018)
as follows:
h′
image = σ(W2 ReLU(W1 himage)) ⊙himage,
W1 ∈R(dmodel/r×dmodel), W2 ∈R(dmodel×dmodel/r)
(18)
where himage is the output of the image encoder
and r = 16 is the reduction ratio. We expect this
method to help the model focus on the most infor-
mative features of the visual embedding, improving
the quality of image representations.
C
Auxiliary Objective Functions
C.1
Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training (CLIP)
We incorporate the Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training (CLIP) objective function into the
training of our base model for image-caption
epochs steps, as follows:
For each sample in a batch, we first extract
pooled representations from both image and text
modalities. For text,we compute mean pooling over
the the output of the text embedding module, which
we denote tpooled. For the image, we use the out-
put of the image encoder directly as its length is
1, ipooled. Both tpooled and ipooled are then projected
to a shared contrastive embedding space through
specific linear projection layers. We L2-normalise
both representations before computing similarity
scores. The contrastive loss is formulated as a bidi-
rectional InfoNCE objective (Oord et al., 2018)
with learnable temperature τ. It combines text-to-
image and image-to-text matching losses, where
each direction maximises the similarity between
matched pairs while minimising similarity with all
other pairs in the batch. The final loss is computed
as Lcontrastive = 1
2(Lt2i + Li2t).
The complete training objective then becomes:
Ltotal = LNTP + λLcontrastive
(19)
where λ represents the weight of the contrastive
loss and NTP stands for next-token prediction.
In our experiments, we initialise τ to 0.07 and
constraint it between 0.05 and 1 during training for
stability, and set λ to 1.
C.2
LexiContrastive Grounding (LCG)
LexiContrastive Grounding (LCG) (Zhuang et al.,
2024) is a training procedure that implements a
grounded language learning objective similar to
CLIP. While CLIP operates at sentence level, LCG
computes similarity scores at the word level. To cal-
culate the cross-modality contrastive learning loss,
LCG leverages the first hidden layer of a model,
which stores lexical information. The authors also
limit the attention mask applied to the first layer
to a previous two-word window in order to encode
less linguistic context. The contrastive loss is then
calculated per batch from all the token-level repre-
sentations outputted by the first layer.
For our model, we adapt and implement the LCG
during the image-caption epochs as follows:
206

Let (texti, imagei) represent the image-caption
pairs in a batch, where i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} and n
is the batch size. Each caption texti contains mi
tokens: (ti,1, ti,2, . . . , ti,mi).
To obtain lexically-focused representations, we
extract the textual representation from the first
layer after the residual connection applied to self-
attention:
h1(texti) = texti + SelfAttn(LayerNorm(texti))
(20)
In our implementation, we experimented with ap-
plying a narrow two-word attention mask, however,
we noticed conflicts with the next token prediction
loss. Specifically, applying the two-word atten-
tion mask in the first layer was preventing the next
token prediction loss from decreasing. We tried
applying the two-word attention mask solely to ex-
tract the hidden representation, then switching to
the original causal mask for the rest of first layer’s
forward pass, as well as skipping the cross-modal
fusion in the first layer, but neither approach fixed
the problem. Therefore, we decided to use the
standard causal attention mask when extracting the
first layer textual hidden representation, as ablation
studies in the original research (Zhuang et al., 2024)
did not indicate a significant loss in performance
for this case.
Let h1(texti, j) ∈Rdmodel be the first layer repre-
sentation of the j-th token (the j-th row of the ma-
trix) in the i-th caption and enc(imagei) ∈Rdmodel
represent the output of the image encoder for the
i-th image. Then, the matching score between the
j-th token in the caption k and image i is calculated
as:
s(i, j, k)=
( Mimage⋅enc(imagei))
T ⋅(Mtext⋅h1(textk, j))
τ
(21)
where Mimage, Mtext ∈Rdmodel×dmodel are learned
projection matrices and τ is a learnable temperature
parameter, which we clamp between [0.05, 2.0] for
training stability.
For each valid token position, we then compute
the LCG contrastive learning loss as:
LLCG =
n
∑
i=1
mi
∑
j=1
1valid(i, j) ⋅1
2[ℓ1(i, j)+ℓ2(i, j)]
(22)
where 1valid(i, j) is an indicator function for non-
padded tokens, and:
ℓ1(i, j) =
es(i,j,i)
∑n
k=1 es(k,j,i) , ℓ2(i, j) = es(i,j,i)
neg(i, j)
(23)
The negative term neg(i, j) is defined as:
neg(i, j) = es(i,j,i) +
n
∑
k=1
k≠i
mk
∑
o=1
1valid(k, o) ⋅es(i,o,k)
(24)
The total loss combines next-token prediction with
word-level contrastive learning loss:
Ltotal = LNTP + λ ⋅LLCG
(25)
where λ is a hyperparameter controlling the
strength of visual grounding. We set λ to 1 through
trial and error such that LNTP and LLCG have the
same magnitude.
We use auxiliary functions only during the
image-caption epochs, as the image processing
stream is skipped for text-only samples.
D
Evaluation Benchmarks and Training
Data
The evaluation pipeline of the BabyLM Challenge
consists of both text-only and multimodal bench-
marks. To evaluate our models, we use the follow-
ing benchmarks from the BabyLM Challenge:
• BLiMP (The Benchmark of Linguistic Mini-
mal Pairs) (Warstadt et al., 2020) evaluates the
linguistic abilities of language models through
grammatical acceptability judgements. It con-
sists of minimal pairs of sentences testing a
specific phenomenon in syntax, semantics or
morphology. Each pair contains one well-
formed sentence and one ungrammatical sen-
tence.
Models are evaluated by checking
whether they assign a higher probability to
the grammatical sentence in each pair.
• BLiMP Supplement is a held-out evaluation
set introduced in the BabyLM Challenge, con-
sisting of five additional linguistic tasks.
• Elements of World Knowledge (EWoK)
(Ivanova et al., 2024) is a zero-shot benchmark
that targets specific world concepts such as so-
cial interactions, spatial relations and physical
dynamics. It uses minimal pairs of context-
target combinations, where the same target
sentence is plausible given one context but
207

implausible given another. Models are evalu-
ated by checking whether they assign a higher
probability to the correct context-target pair.
• Winoground (Thrush et al., 2022) evaluates
visio-linguistic compositional reasoning in
vision-language models. The dataset consists
of hand-curated examples where models must
correctly match two images with two cap-
tions that contain identical words but in differ-
ent orders (e.g., “some plants surrounding a
lightbulb" vs “a lightbulb surrounding some
plants"). Models are evaluated by checking
whether they assign a higher probability to the
correct caption given the input image.
• VQA v2.0 (Goyal et al., 2017) is an evalua-
tion dataset containing pairs of similar images
with identical questions but different correct
answers, which forces models to ground their
responses in visual content rather than rely on
linguistic priors alone. Questions cover mul-
tiple categories, such as object recognition,
counting and spatial reasoning. Models are
evaluated based on which answer they assign
the highest probability given the input image
and question.
The BabyLM Challenge organisers provide an
image-text pre-training dataset for the Vision track,
which we use in our work. This dataset consists of
two parts: text-only data and text-image data, each
containing approximately 50 million words.
The text-only dataset is a subset of the train-
ing data proposed for the BabyLM Challenge text-
only track. The organisers argue that this dataset is
cognitively plausible, consisting of child-directed
speech (CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000)), dia-
logue (British National Corpus (BNC) conversation
section3, Switchboard Dialog Act Corpus (Stolcke
et al., 2000)), children’s stories (Project Gutenberg
(Gerlach and Font-Clos, 2020)), movie subtitles
(OpenSubtitles (Lison and Tiedemann, 2016)) and
Wikipedia4 content.
The multimodal dataset consists of image-
caption pairs selected from the Conceptual Cap-
tions 3M dataset (Sharma et al., 2018), and the
MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) and Open Images
(Kuznetsova et al., 2020) subsets of the Localized
Narratives dataset (Pont-Tuset et al., 2020). The
Conceptual Captions dataset consists of millions
3http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk
4https://www.wikipedia.org
of images paired with natural language descrip-
tions automatically scraped, cleaned and filtered
from web image alt-text, while the Localized Nar-
ratives dataset contains image-caption pairs manu-
ally annotated with synchronised mouse traces that
spatially ground each word or phrase to specific
regions in the image. The images are provided in
both raw format and as visual embeddings com-
puted by a visual model using DINOv2 (Choshen
et al., 2024; Oquab et al., 2023), a state-of-the-art
unsupervised learning algorithm. We use these vi-
sual embeddings in both our training and evaluation
due to computational constraints.
E
Data Curriculum
Since the training dataset consists of both text-only
data and image-caption data, each accounting for
50M words, we implement and analyse multiple
coarse-grained and fine-grained data curriculum
strategies for training.
Coarse-grained epochs:
We load the text-
only and image-caption data in separate PyTorch
(Imambi et al., 2021) data loaders, where each data
loader alone is used for one epoch. For the 10
epochs constraint of the BabyLM Challenge, this
results in 10 text-only epochs and 10 image-caption
epochs. We then experiment with the following:
1. Alternating between image-caption epochs
and text-only epochs;
2. Training on all text-only epochs first, then on
the image-caption epochs;
3. Training on all image-caption epochs first,
then on the text-only epochs.
Fine-grained epochs:
For the fine-grained
epochs, we define the following two training strate-
gies:
1. We load both the text-only data and the image-
caption data in the same data loader, where
we pair the text-only data with image ten-
sors filled with 0s for uniformity. The cross-
modality path is still skipped in the text-only
samples. The original text data is provided in
.txt files, and we process each text line as one
sample. For the image-caption data, we pro-
cess each (image, caption) pair as one sample.
In this setting, the text-only data has twice
as many samples as the image-caption data.
Therefore, loading and shuffling them in the
208

same data loader results in a non-uniform dis-
tribution between the two and more unstable
training.
2. For a uniform distribution between the image-
caption data and the text-only data, we take
inspiration from the GitHub repository5 used
to train the BabyLM 2024 Challenge base-
lines, where the authors pair each text-only in-
put with one image-caption input in the same
batch sample, resulting in uniform batches.
Therefore, in one training step, we perform
two forward passes: one using the text-only
input and one using the image-caption input.
We then sum the losses from each pass and
do one backward propagation using the total
loss. However, since there are twice as many
text-only samples than image-caption sam-
ples, this results in training the model twice
on the image-caption dataset. For 10 training
epochs, this equals 10 text-only epochs and
20 image-caption epochs.
For a fair comparison among all of the methods
we implement in this work, we alternate between
text-only epochs and image-caption epochs in our
experiments exploring architectural changes and
auxiliary objective functions. That is because the
contrastive learning objective functions compute
similarity scores between a caption and all the im-
ages in a batch. If the batch contains (many) text-
only samples, it cancels the effect of the auxiliary
losses.
Empirical results we obtain support this choice
among the data curriculum strategies we define.
Figure 4 visualises the scores of our base model
for the different data curriculum strategies evalu-
ated using the BabyLM Challenge 2024 evaluation
pipeline6.
For BLiMP, the pattern in subfigure 4a suggests
that (1) the text-only dataset supports the BLiMP
benchmark far more than the image-caption one,
and (2) these strategies result in catastrophic for-
getting for the model by the end of training.
For BLiMP Supplement, the optimal data cur-
riculum strategy is less clear, as the model’s perfor-
mance oscillates when alternating between epoch
types. Comparing the text-only epochs first and
image-caption epochs first strategies shows that the
5https://github.com/aaronmueller/babylm_
multimodal_training
6https://github.com/babylm/
evaluation-pipeline-2024
image-caption dataset better supports the model on
BLiMP Supplement than the text-only dataset. In-
terestingly, the model’s performance score consis-
tently decreases over checkpoints when the model
is trained using the non-uniform mixed strategy.
A possible explanation for this result is that since
there are more text-only samples in a batch than
image-caption samples, the gradient updates are
dominated by the text-only data, reducing the ef-
fect of the image-caption samples.
Similar to the other analyses in this work, chang-
ing the data curriculum strategy has no visible ef-
fect on the EWoK benchmark, underscoring that
the training data might not be well-suited for this
benchmark.
Training our base model using the uniform mixed
strategy results in a higher Winoground score, with
several checkpoints achieving over 53% on this
benchmark. However, a significant factor contribut-
ing to this result is the amount of image-caption
training data, which is double for this strategy than
for the others. Comparing the text-only epochs first
and image-caption epochs first strategies, it can be
seen that the model performs better on Winoground
when consistently trained on the image-caption
dataset. Using the non-uniform mixed strategy re-
sults in a more unstable performance and a lower
final score, possibly due to the dominance of text-
only samples in the training batches.
As shown in subfigure 4e, the alternating be-
tween text-only and image-caption epochs strategy
achieves the best performance on VQA. There is
a significant performance gap between the model
trained using alternating epochs compared to the
mixed strategies (over 5%), as well as the text-only
epochs first and image-caption epochs first strate-
gies (over 10%). The alternating epochs strategy
shows an almost consistent increase over check-
points, whereas the model’s performance in the
mixed variants remains flat, and decreases for the
text-only epochs first and image-caption epochs
first strategies. The results of the coarse-grained
strategies are likely due to the training data. The
image-caption dataset supports the visual reason-
ing component of VQA, while the text-only dataset
supports the question format by containing turn-
taking constructions and a significantly larger num-
ber of questions than the other dataset. Training
the model consistently on only one epoch type de-
prives it of one of these complementary compo-
nents. Training by alternating between epoch types
appears to strike a balance and avoid catastrophic
209

(a) BLiMP scores.
(b) BLiMP Supplement scores.
(c) EWoK scores.
(d) Winoground scores.
(e) VQA scores.
Figure 4: The performance of our base model on BLiMP, BLiMP Supplement, EWoK, Winoground and VQA for
different data curriculum strategies, evaluated using the BabyLM Challenge 2024 evaluation pipeline. The uniform
mixed strategy follows a different definition than the others, where the number of steps in an epoch equals the
number of text-only samples. This results in ∼700K training steps for 10 epochs, which are marked in the graphs by
the blue dashed line. The end of 10 epochs for the other data curriculum strategies is marked by the black dashed
line at step ∼1107K.
forgetting. The results of the uniform mixed strat-
egy are slightly surprising given that the Flamingo
and GIT baselines achieve higher VQA scores us-
ing this approach, however, the difference could
stem from using a lower learning rate and a differ-
ent text-only to image-caption data ratio.
F
Training Dynamics
In figure 5, we visualise the performance of our
base model, evaluated every 50,000 steps on the
five benchmarks using the BabyLM Challenge
2024 evaluation pipeline, when alternating between
text-only and image-caption epochs. The brown
dotted lines indicate that the checkpoint was saved
210

(a) BLiMP, BLiMP Supplement and EWoK scores.
(b) Winoground and VQA scores.
Figure 5: The performance of our base model every 50,000 steps on the BLiMP, BLiMP Supplement, EWoK,
Winoground and VQA benchmarks. The brown doted lines indicate that the checkpoint was saved during a text-only
epoch, while the green dashed lines indicate that the checkpoint was saved during an image-caption epoch.
during a text-only epoch, while the green dashed
lines indicate that the checkpoint was saved during
an image-caption epoch. For BLIMP Supplement
and VQA, an interesting pattern emerges: the per-
formance scores significantly oscillate based on the
type of data on which the model was last trained.
The data that the model was last trained on can
be regarded as a fine-tuning step. Thus, we make
the following observations:
The base model achieves better performance
on BLiMP Supplement during image-caption
epochs. As shown in subfigure 5a, our base model
obtains higher scores on BLiMP Supplement, a
text-only benchmark evaluating grammar, at check-
points saved during image-caption epochs com-
pared to text-only epochs. We investigate the break-
down of the BLiMP Supplement scores and notice
that the score difference for different epoch types
stems from two subtasks, subject-auxiliary inver-
sion and turn-taking. For these subtasks, the per-
formance of our base model fluctuates by even
∼10% between checkpoints. We thus investigate
the log probability scores of our base model for
each subtask example at checkpoints 500,000 (text-
only epoch) and 550,000 (image-caption epoch),
for which the former model is incorrect and the
latter is correct. These two checkpoints present the
highest difference in BLiMP Supplement scores
(7.54%). We make the following observations:
1. For the subject-auxiliary inversion, 68.2% of
the examples for which the model at check-
point 500,000 (text-only epoch) is incorrect
and the model at checkpoint 550,000 (image-
caption epoch) is correct have the correct sen-
211

tence of the pair starting with “Is" followed by
a noun phrase. For example, pairs such as (“Is
the host expecting an award-winning director
that hasn’t finished dressing yet?", “Hasn’t the
host is expecting an award-winning director
that finished dressing yet?"). This contrasts
with the distribution of the task, where 31.1%
of the pairs have the correct sentence starting
with “Is" followed by a noun phrase. We theo-
rise that the Localized Narratives dataset sup-
ports the model at checkpoint 550,000 (image-
caption epoch) in choosing the "Is" followed
by noun phrase sentences with higher prob-
ability, which happen to be the correct sen-
tences in these pairs. That is because there
are 706,251 constructions of the form “there
is" followed by a noun phrase in the Local-
ized Narratives dataset. We hypothesise that
as a result, our model learns that the pattern
“is" followed by a noun phrase is more likely
during the image-caption epochs.
2. For the turn taking subtask, even if the model
at checkpoint 550,000 (image-caption epoch)
chooses the correct sentence more often, it
does so with little confidence. For most exam-
ples for which checkpoint 550,000 (image-
caption epoch) is correct and checkpoint
500,000 (text-only epoch) is not, the log prob-
ability difference between the correct and in-
correct sentence of the former checkpoint is
less than 2 points. To put this in context, the
log probability scores range between -89 and
-156, for which 2 points represent 0.013% to
0.0225%. There is no noticeable pattern in the
training data that can motivate the model’s bet-
ter performance during image-caption epochs
on the the turn taking subtask. We conclude
that this behaviour requires further investiga-
tion which we leave for future work.
The base model achieves better performance on
VQA during text-only epochs. In figure 5b, it can
be noticed the score of our base model on VQA
oscillates by 5% to 10% between text-only epochs
and image-caption epochs. We theorise that the
cause of these variations is the difference in textual
data between the two types of epochs. There are
no turn-taking constructions in the image-caption
datasets, and the number of questions (25,300 ques-
tion marks) is significantly lower than in the text-
only datasets (1,083,559 question marks). How-
ever, both are present in the format of the VQA
text data. Therefore, we conclude that the image-
caption datasets support the VQA task less due to
differences in the text format. We argue that for a
high score on VQA during image-caption epochs,
the image-caption datasets should contain samples
similar to the task.
The alternation between text-only and image-
caption epochs has little to no effect on the
BLiMP, EWoK and Winoground benchmarks
for the base model. As shown in figure 5, there
is little oscillation between text-only and image-
caption epochs on the BLiMP benchmark, suggest-
ing that the text-only dataset supports the model
better for this task, but the score generally in-
creases. There are no noticeable patterns for EWoK
or Winoground.
Note: The reason the scores in all benchmarks
stabilise after checkpoint 800,000 is because of
the small learning rate (5e-5) combined with the
learning rate schedule (cosine annealing) we chose
for training. After checkpoint 800,000, the learning
rate gradually decreases from 1e-5 to 0, which has
little effect on the gradients.
G
Correlation to Imageability Scores
Category
Gate Selection
Mean (SD)
# words
Very Low (<342)
0.427 (0.143) 401
Low (342-450)
0.481 (0.130) 96
High (450-558)
0.378 (0.126) 78
Very High (>558) 0.351 (0.155) 140
Categories defined as µ ± σ based on the MRC database.
SD = standard deviation.
Table 3: Mean gate value per imageability bin for our
base model (incorporating a soft gate per feature).
Table 3 summarises the mean gate values for our
base model corresponding to meaningful image-
ability bins, defined using cutpoints at mean ± 1
SD from the MRC database (Coltheart, 1981).
H
Experiments Setup
For all architectural features and training strategies
we define in subsections 3.3-E and A-C, we con-
duct experiments in the form of ablation studies in
order to evaluate each potential improvement in iso-
lation. We select our base architecture, described in
section 3.2, and define one experiment per feature.
We train each enhanced model in the same condi-
tions and evaluate it on five BabyLM Challenge
212

benchmarks: BLiMP, BLiMP Supplement, EwoK,
Winoground and VQA.
H.1
Base Model Implementation Details
We implement our dual stream transformer in Py-
Torch (Imambi et al., 2021), following the archi-
tecture we introduce in section 3.2. We summarise
our hyperparameter choices for the base model in
table 4.
We use pre-layer normalisation rather than post-
layer normalisation in our implementation as pre-
vious research shows that pre-layer normalisation
provides better training stability for networks larger
than six layers (Takase et al., 2022), which is cru-
cial given our limited training budget and inability
to perform extensive hyperparameter searches.
Following standard transformer design, we
use residual connections around each sub-layer
(feed-forward networks, self-attention and cross-
attention).
While
the
image
encoder
may
be
over-
parameterised for single token processing, empiri-
cal results validate this choice (Appendix I), and it
ensures architectural consistency and directly com-
parable results for future extensions to patch-based
visual inputs.
H.2
Training Details
We train all of our models using the hyperparame-
ters summarised in table 5 using the BabyLM Chal-
lenge 2024 evaluation pipeline, with the exception
of a few changes for the auxiliary objective func-
tion and data curriculum experiments. In the case
of the auxiliary objective function experiments, we
increase the batch size from 64 to 128 as a larger
batch size is recommended for contrastive learn-
ing (Chen et al., 2020), which results in a total of
553,510 steps. Due to computational constraints,
we were not able to select a larger batch size. In the
case of the data curriculum experiments, the data
order differs according to the strategy we define
for that experiment. For the model trained using
LexiContrastive Grounding as the auxiliary func-
tion, we use weight tying as recommended in the
original work (Zhuang et al., 2024).
We select a learning rate of 5e-5 to ensure train-
ing stability, despite this being conservative for the
model size. While alternating between text-only
and image-caption epochs improves performance
on the benchmarks (as shown in Appendix E), this
training regime can cause gradient instability when
transitioning between epoch types. Therefore, we
adopt a lower learning rate to mitigate this risk.
H.3
Data Pipeline Details
The text-only training dataset is provided in .txt
files, while the multimodal one is provided in .json
files for the captions and .npy for the image embed-
dings, where each row in the numpy array embeds
one image as a global token of dimension 768. We
load the text-only data as one training sample per
line, and the image-caption data as one (image, cap-
tion) pair representing one training sample. We do
not perform any preprocessing on either data.
For the text-only data and the captions, we to-
kenise the text using the GPT-2 tokeniser (Radford
et al., 2019), as our model is autoregressive. We
also add the BOS and EOS special tokens at the be-
ginning and end of each text-only/caption sample,
respectively.
We split the data into 80% training, 10% valida-
tion and 10% held-out test sets. In order to ensure
that all models are trained on the same data, we
save the data split indices and reuse them for all ex-
periments. We shuffle the training dataset indepen-
dently for each run while maintaining consistent
train/validation/test partitions.
I
Design Choices for the Image
Processing Pipeline
Despite using only global image embeddings, we
chose to implement an image encoder in our frame-
work for the following reasons:
• Future compatibility: We aim to develop fu-
ture iterations of this framework that address
current limitations by using patch tokens in-
stead of global image embeddings. For com-
parable results, we choose to use an encoder
for the CLS token as well, which benefits from
feed-forward and normalisation layers, but not
self-attention. The image encoder outputs a
non-linear adaptation of pre-trained visual fea-
tures and improves alignment with the text
stream.
• Empirical performance: We experimented
with three variants: (1) directly using linearly
projected DINOv2 embeddings, (2) applying
a 2-layer multi-layer-perceptron (MLP), and
(3) using the transformer encoder. The en-
coder variant demonstrated superior perfor-
mance across benchmarks, which can be at-
213

tributed to the encoder’s deeper transforma-
tion capacity. The benchmark scores for the
three variants are available in table 7.
• Computational efficiency: An alternative to
the image encoder is to import and fully or
partially unfreeze the external pre-trained im-
age encoder used in the BabyLM Challenge,
facebook/dino2-base7. However, this would
require processing the raw images through
the entire encoder (86.6 million parameters)
during training, which would significantly in-
crease the computational costs for data load-
ing, forward passes (and backward passes if
unfrozen) and memory usage. This approach
contradicts the constraints of the challenge,
which advocates for the fair use of computa-
tional resources. In contrast, a customisable
image encoder component taking as input pre-
computed embeddings can be modified based
on the user’s computational constraints.
Table 7 summarises the performance of the base
model with different image processing pipelines,
evaluated every 200,000 steps on BLiMP, BLiMP
Supplement, EWoK, Winoground and VQA using
the BabyLM Challenge 2024 evaluation pipeline.
As shown, the results on BLiMP, BLiMP Supple-
ment and VQA validate the use of a transformer
encoder, for which the base model achieves the
best scores. However, since a single image embed-
ding cannot benefit from the self-attention mecha-
nism, an MLP encoder suffices if computational re-
sources are a constraint, achieving competitive per-
formance .Besides the superior performance, the
motivation for using a transformer encoder in this
work was to enable a direct performance compari-
son with future iterations of the framework using
patch-token embeddings.
7https://huggingface.co/facebook/dinov2-base
214

Model Hyperparameter
Value
Model Dimensions
Model dimension (dmodel)
768
Hidden dimension
3072
Number of attention heads
8
Image encoder layers
5
Decoder layers
8
Vocabulary & Sequence
Vocabulary size
50,260 (GPT-2 tokeniser (Radford et al., 2019))
Maximum sequence length
128
Special tokens
[PAD], [BOS], [EOS]
Activation & Regularisation
Activation function
GELU (Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2016)
Dropout rate
0.1
Layer normalisation
Pre-layer norm
Layer norm epsilon
1e-5 (PyTorch default)
Input Dimensions
DINOv2 embedding dimension 768
DINOv2 representation
CLS token only
Model Statistics
Total parameters
∼198.5M
Table 4: The hyperparameters list for our dual stream transformer base model.
Training Hyperparameter
Value
Data order
Alternating between text-only and image-caption epochs
Number of epochs
10 text-only and 10 image-caption
Total number of steps
1,107,020
Checkpoints saved
Every 50,000 steps
Batch size
64
Learning rate
5e-5
Learning rate schedule
Cosine annealing
Optimiser
AdamW with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, ϵ = 1e −8
Number of steps for warmup ∼1%
Weight decay
0.01
Gradient clipping norm
1.0
Main loss function
Cross-entropy
Random seed
42
Table 5: The hyperparameters list for our base training regime.
215

# Model Architecture
Model Hyperparams
Training Config
1 Base model (§3.2)
Defaulta
Defaultb
Dynamic Gating
2 Base model + no gate
Defaulta
Defaultb
3 Base model + soft gate per feature
Defaulta
Defaultb
4 Base model + soft gate per token
Defaulta
Defaultb
5 Base model + hard gate per feature
Defaulta
Defaultb
6 Base model + hard gate per token
Defaulta
Defaultb
Feature Representation
7 Base model + FiLM on text
Defaulta
Defaultb
8 Base model + FiLM on image
Defaulta
Defaultb
9 Base model + FiLM on cross-attention
Defaulta
Defaultb
10 Base model + DyIntra on text
Defaulta
Defaultb
11 Base model + DyIntra on image
Defaulta
Defaultb
12 Base model + DyIntra on cross-attention Defaulta
Defaultb
13 Base model + Channel Attention
Defaulta
Defaultb
Auxiliary Objectives
14 Base model
Defaulta
Defaultb + CLIP (BS=128)
15 Base model
Defaulta + weight tying Defaultb + LCG (BS=128)
Data Curriculum
16 Base model
Defaulta
Text-only →image-captionc
17 Base model
Defaulta
Image-caption →text-onlyd
18 Base model
Defaulta
Non-uniform mixe
19 Base model
Defaulta
Uniform mix
aAs in Table 4
bAs in Table 5
BS = batch size
cFirst 10 epochs text-only, next 10 epochs image-caption
dFirst 10 epochs image-caption, next 10 epochs text-only
eImage-caption and text-only data non-uniformly mixed in same batch
Table 6: Summary of all the experiments we conduct in this work.
216

Model
Checkpoint
BLiMP
BLiMP S.
EWoK
Winoground
VQA
Base +
No Encoder
200K
69.99 ± 0.17 54.03 ± 0.52 49.87 ± 0.57
51.74 ± 1.83
43.00 ± 0.31
400K
73.21 ± 0.16 53.33 ± 0.62 49.93 ± 0.57
52.68 ± 1.83
46.54 ± 0.31
600K
72.82 ± 0.16 52.89 ± 0.65 50.38 ± 0.57
52.95 ± 1.83
46.41 ± 0.31
800K
73.40 ± 0.16 53.69 ± 0.64 50.16 ± 0.57
52.41 ± 1.83
46.52 ± 0.31
1M
73.17 ± 0.16 53.62 ± 0.64 50.43 ± 0.57
52.14 ± 1.83
46.65 ± 0.31
1.107M
74.29 ± 0.16 55.63 ± 0.58 50.18 ± 0.57
51.21 ± 1.83
45.02 ± 0.31
Base +
MLP
Encoder
200K
70.66 ± 0.17 57.42 ± 0.49 50.03 ± 0.57
52.01 ± 1.83
41.72 ± 0.31
400K
73.47 ± 0.16 51.89 ± 0.66 49.96 ± 0.57
50.67 ± 1.83
48.41 ± 0.31
600K
73.20 ± 0.16 52.49 ± 0.68 50.02 ± 0.57
52.01 ± 1.83
43.32 ± 0.31
800K
74.06 ± 0.16 51.71 ± 0.67 50.47 ± 0.57
52.28 ± 1.83
48.18 ± 0.31
1M
73.71 ± 0.16 50.56 ± 0.67 50.21 ± 0.57
52.55 ± 1.83
48.54 ± 0.31
1.107M
74.35 ± 0.16 55.38 ± 0.60 50.21 ± 0.57
50.27 ± 1.83
49.83 ± 0.31
Base +
Transformer
Encoder
200K
69.97 ± 0.17 55.02 ± 0.54 49.83 ± 0.57
51.07 ± 1.83
34.11 ± 0.32
400K
73.22 ± 0.16 51.88 ± 0.66 50.13 ± 0.57
50.94 ± 1.83
47.82 ± 0.31
600K
73.47 ± 0.16 53.08 ± 0.62 50.74 ± 0.57
51.61 ± 1.83
48.36 ± 0.31
800K
74.18 ± 0.16 52.69 ± 0.62 50.69 ± 0.57
52.41 ± 1.83
51.2 ± 0.31
1M
74.34 ± 0.16 54.00 ± 0.61 50.82 ± 0.57
52.41 ± 1.83
51.2 ± 0.31
1.107M
75.53 ± 0.16 55.71 ± 0.57 50.41 ± 0.57
51.74 ± 1.83
50.02 ± 0.31
Table 7: The performance of the base model with different image processing pipelines, evaluated using the
2024 BabyLM Challenge evaluation pipeline. The models are evaluated every 200,000 steps on BLiMP, BLiMP
Supplement, EWoK, Winoground and VQA.
217
