Proceedings of the First BabyLM Workshop, pages 226–236
November 8, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics
Two ways into the hall of mirrors: Language exposure and lossy memory
drive cross-linguistic grammaticality illusions in language models
Kate McCurdy and Katharina Christian and Amelie Seyfriend and Mikhail Sonkin
Saarland University
Abstract
Readers of English — but not Dutch or Ger-
man — consistently show a grammaticality il-
lusion: they find ungrammatical double-center-
embedded sentences easier to process than
corresponding grammatical sentences. If pre-
trained language model (LM) surprisal mimics
these cross-linguistic patterns, this implies that
language statistics explain the effect; if, how-
ever, the illusion requires memory constraints
such as lossy context surprisal (LCS), this sug-
gests a critical role for memory. We evaluate
LMs in Dutch, German, and English. We find
that both factors influence LMs’ susceptibility
to grammaticality illusions, and neither fully
account for human-like processing patterns.
1
Introduction
Modern neural language models (LMs) produce flu-
ent, grammatical language (Mahowald et al., 2024),
but their validity as models of human linguistic
cognition remains contested (Cuskley et al., 2024).
One key concern is the scale of data exposure: LMs
often learn from quantities of linguistic data which
exceed human lifespans. This motivates research
with LMs trained on human-scale data, as these
models may have a greater claim to cognitive plau-
sibility (Wilcox et al., 2025).
Another dimension of cognitive plausibility con-
cerns language processing rather than learning.
Language model surprisal robustly predicts mea-
sures of incremental language processing such as
reading time (Wilcox et al., 2023). Despite this,
LMs fail to fully reproduce certain processing ef-
fects which are well-established in the experimen-
tal literature, such as recovery from syntactically
ambiguous “garden-path” sentences (Arehalli et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2024). Such systematic diver-
gences from human processing further challenge
LMs’ cognitive plausibility. Moreover, the two is-
sues may be connected: larger LMs trained on more
data are worse at approximating reading time (Oh
saw
treated
ran
a marathon
saw
ran
a marathon
sah
behandelte
lief
einen Marathon
sah
lief
einen Marathon
English
German
V1
V2
V3
Det1−N1
500
1000
1500
500
1000
1500
Region
RT
Condition
a
a
grammatical
ungrammatical
Figure 1: Example of the grammaticality illusion in
reading time (RT) for (1a) vs. (1b) in English (upper),
and the converse effect in German (lower), using mean
RTs from Vasishth et al. (2010, Expts. 1 and 3). Ger-
man speakers take longer to read the post-verbal NP
(“einen Marathon”) in the ungrammatical, missing-verb
condition, while English speakers instead read the NP
faster when the verb is missing.
and Schuler, 2023), raising the possibility that non-
human-scale learning contributes to non-human-
like processing.
One important lens on linguistic cognition comes
from language illusions, i.e. ungrammatical or oth-
erwise infelicitous sentences which humans should
reject, but nonetheless find acceptable (Phillips
et al., 2011). For example, consider the follow-
ing two sentences (cf. Figure 1):
1.
(a) The painter who the doctor who the lady
saw treated ran a marathon.
(b) *The painter who the doctor who the lady
saw ran a marathon.
(1a) contains double nested center-embedded
clauses, which are rare and challenging in English
(Hamilton and Deese, 1971) but indisputably gram-
matical. (1b), on the other hand, is ungrammatical
due to missing a verb. Despite this, speakers con-
sistently prefer sentences like (1b) to their gram-
matical counterparts (Gibson and Thomas, 1999;
226

Christiansen and MacDonald, 2009). This process-
ing effect is known as the grammaticality illusion.
What causes the grammaticality illusion? Two
competing hypotheses have been proposed. Under
the memory account, constrained working memory
causes readers to forget earlier sentence material,
thereby nullifying the expectation of a third verb
(Gibson and Thomas, 1999). This proposal ap-
peals to general cognitive mechanisms; however,
Vasishth et al. (2010) and Frank et al. (2016) find
that the illusion appears for reading times in En-
glish, but not in German or Dutch. They posit an al-
ternative language statistics hypothesis: the gram-
maticality illusion arises due to the relative rarity of
center-embedded clauses in English. Researchers
have evaluated these two accounts with compu-
tational models (Engelmann and Vasishth, 2009;
Christiansen and MacDonald, 2009; Frank, 2014;
Futrell et al., 2020). These simulations, however,
predate today’s language models (LMs), which rep-
resent linguistic distributions to unprecedented lev-
els of precision.
In this paper, we use modern LMs to assess these
two hypotheses with respect to the grammaticality
illusion. LMs effectively implement the language
statistics account. If the distribution of English
gives rise to the illusion, then English LMs should
assign higher surprisal to the post-verbal region a
marathon in the grammatical sentence (1a) com-
pared to the ungrammatical (1b), while German
and Dutch LMs should do the converse. Moreover,
this cross-linguistic divergence should hold steady,
or even grow, with increased training data: if lan-
guage statistics drive the effect, then higher data
exposure during training should reinforce these re-
spective language-specific outcomes.
If, however, memory constraints are critical to
the illusion, we may see two different patterns.
Firstly, the grammaticality illusion in English may
be mediated by language model capacity in the
opposite direction (cf. Oh and Schuler, 2023). In
this scenario, smaller models trained on human-
scale data may show the illusion, while larger LMs
consistently prefer the grammatical sequence. Sec-
ondly, the grammaticality illusion may be mediated
by retention of the preceding linguistic context,
such that Lossy Context Surprisal shows the effect
at higher forgetting rates (LCS; Futrell et al., 2020).
Our results suggest that both language statis-
tics and memory constraints influence how LMs
process double-center-embedded sentences, with
mixed implications for human sentence process-
Figure 2: Grammaticality effects in reading time (RT)
for Dutch and English stimuli, reproduced from Frank
et al. (2016, Expts. 1–3). At the post-verbal determiner
(Det1), RT is higher for ungrammatical sentences in
Dutch (left), but lower in English (middle, right).
ing. For the language statistics hypothesis, we find
robust support from Dutch, but for German and
English the picture is more complicated. Larger
English LMs reproduce the missing verb illusion,
which decisively supports the hypothesis. Medium-
sized models, however, show the opposite effect,
and larger German LMs also unexpectedly show
the illusion — neither of which are expected un-
der a language statistics account. For the memory
hypothesis, we find that Resource-Rational Lossy
Context Surprisal (RR-LCS; Hahn et al., 2022) sim-
ulates the grammaticality illusion at higher forget-
ting rates in both English and German; however,
we do not observe the expected language-specific
interaction in effect direction. These findings high-
light continuing challenges in applying LMs as
cognitive models of human language processing.
2
Related work
2.1
Grammaticality illusion effects across
languages
English speakers consistently prefer ungrammati-
cal sentences like 1b to grammatical double-center-
embedded sentences like 1a. This missing verb
effect has been found in both acceptability judg-
ments (Gibson and Thomas, 1999; Frank and Ernst,
2019; Huang and Phillips, 2021) and measures of
online processing such as reading time (Vasishth
et al., 2010; Frank et al., 2016, 2021).
Some
researchers have argued that this effect reflects
language-specific distributions of center-embedded
sentences (e.g. Vasishth et al., 2010; Pañeda and
Lago, 2024). Figure 2 presents key evidence for
this language statistics hypothesis: the missing
verb effect appears in English, but not in the related
227

language Dutch. Strikingly, the English reading
times shown in Figure 2 come from first language
speakers of Dutch and German — speakers who do
not show this effect when reading their native lan-
guage. The fact that the grammaticality illusion ap-
pears robustly for particular languages, rather than
particular speakers, supports the language statis-
tics hypothesis. Under this account, we would ex-
pect modern language models to show comparable
language-dependent preferences: lower surprisal
for grammatical Dutch and German sentences, and
ungrammatical English sentences.
The main alternative hypothesis states that
the grammaticality illusion is driven by domain-
general memory constraints (Gibson and Thomas,
1999). Language-specific effects (cf. Figure 2)
clearly challenge this account. In response, some
recent work has explored how working memory
could be mediated by particular linguistic proper-
ties. For instance, relative clauses in German and
Dutch use different word order from main clauses;
Bader and colleagues (Bader, 2016; Häussler and
Bader, 2015) argue that this syntactic distinction
may facilitate retrieval from memory in German,
but not English. Huang and Phillips (2021) build
on this account to characterize a similar illusion in
Mandarin. Finally, Futrell and colleagues (Futrell
and Levy, 2017; Futrell et al., 2020) integrate the
two hypotheses with a model of memory directly
mediated by language statistics, which we consider
at length in the following section.
2.2
Processing illusions in language models
A number of computational modeling studies have
found support for the language statistics hypothesis,
although much of this previous work relies upon
simulated training data. Christiansen and Chater
(1999), Engelmann and Vasishth (2009), and Chris-
tiansen and MacDonald (2009) trained recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) on two distinct proba-
bilistic context-free grammar (PCFG)-generated
corpora with differing relative clause distributions,
reflecting corpus frequencies from German and
English. These models capture human-like gram-
maticality preferences for double center-embedded
constructions in each language respectively. Frank
(2014) trained RNN language models on natu-
ral corpora from English and Dutch, and Frank
et al. (2016) find that these models reproduce the
language-specific grammaticality effects observed
in their behavioral experiments (Figure 2). Notably,
however, the English model did not fully reproduce
the strength of the preference for ungrammatical
sentences; it showed lower surprisal in the missing
verb condition, but this difference did not reach
statistical significance.
Futrell et al. (2020) introduce lossy context sur-
prisal (LCS), a model which synthesizes memory-
based and language statistics accounts. The core
intuition is that speakers rely on noisy memory rep-
resentations to predict upcoming words, and the
noisy memory is more likely to recall structures
which are more frequent in their language. There-
fore, even if speakers typically forget 20–30% of
the words in a given sentence context, a German
speaker is more likely to correctly retain multiple
verb-final relative clauses than an English speaker,
simply due to the greater prevalence of such con-
structions in German. Futrell et al. similarly eval-
uate their model on a PCFG-derived corpus, with
the additional manipulation of a forgetting parame-
ter. Their LCS model predicts that, at certain levels
of memory loss, English comprehenders will ex-
hibit the grammaticality illusion, whereas German
comprehenders will not. The LCS model thus pro-
vides, in principle, a memory-based account for
language-specific grammaticality effects (although
cf. Huang and Phillips, 2021).
If the grammaticality illusion in English reflects
memory constraints, however, we would not ex-
pect it to arise from modern Transformer-based
language models (LMs) (Vaswani et al., 2017),
which have drastically larger memory capacities
than the RNNs evaluated by Frank et al. (2016).
Modern LMs have shown some susceptibility to
other language illusions, for instance in processing
negative polarity items (Zhang et al., 2023) and
number agreement (Arehalli and Linzen, 2024). In
terms of memory, however, modern LMs seem to
show superhuman linguistic memory in certain re-
spects (Oh and Schuler, 2023; Oh et al., 2024). The
missing verb illusion, then, presents a key test case
for the language statistics hypothesis: if it truly
reflects language statistics rather than memory lim-
itations, then large modern LMs should reproduce
the preference for ungrammatical double center-
embeddings in English.
3
Methods
3.1
Models and measures
Surprisal
We test2 multiple pretrained language
models (LMs), listed in Table 1.We select these
2github.com/kmccurdy/grammaticality-illusion-LMs
228

Language
Model
Family
Parameters Training data
Reference
Dutch
GPT2-S Dutch
GPT
129M
33B
de Vries and Nissim (2020)
GPT2-M Dutch
GPT
380M
LLaMA2 Dutch
Llama
13B
2B
Vanroy (2023)
German
GerPT2-L
GPT
876M
50B
Minixhofer (2020)
BLOOM
GPT
6.4B
50B
Ostendorff and Rehm (2023)
LEO-LM
Llama
7B
65B
Plüster and Schuhmann (2023)
13B
English
GPT-BERT-S
GPT-BERT
30M
100M
Charpentier and Samuel (2024)
GPT-BERT
GPT-BERT
119M
GPT2-mini
GPT
39M
≈2.25B
Fagnou (2024)
GPT2
GPT
137M
≈15B
Radford et al. (2019)
GPT2-L
GPT
812M
GPT-Neo
GPT
2.72B
420B
Black et al. (2021)
GPT-J
GPT
6B
DeepSeek1
DeepSeek
7B
2T
DeepSeek-AI et al. (2024)
LLaMA2
Llama
7B
2T
Touvron et al. (2023)
13B
Multiple
mGPT
GPT
1.3B
≈450B EN,
100B DE, 50B NL
Shliazhko et al. (2024)
13B
LLaMAX
Llama
6.74B
≈950M EN,
900M DE, 590M NL Lu et al. (2024)
EuroLLM
Llama
9.15B
≈2T EN,
240B DE, 100B NL Martins et al. (2024)
Table 1: Language models used in experiments. ‘Training Data’ refers to language-specific training data in tokens.
Note that all monolingual Dutch and German models are initialized from models pre-trained on English.
models to span a range of sizes and training
regimes, but focus only on models trained on
the language modeling objective, e.g. excluding
instruction-tuned models.
We follow previous work (e.g. Futrell et al.,
2019) in using LM surprisal to measure incremen-
tal processing difficulty. Surprisal is calculated as
the negative log probability of a word3 wT condi-
tioned on the sequence of preceding words:
−log P(wT+1|w1...T )
(1)
Lossy Context Surprisal
Lossy context sur-
prisal (Futrell et al., 2020) has been proposed
to model language-specific effects of constrained
memory.
We use a specific implementation:
resource-rational lossy context surprisal (RR-LCS),
proposed by Hahn et al. (2022). RR-LCS provides
a fully data-driven implementation of LCS, with
only one free parameter: the forgetting rate. Cru-
cially, we can train a range of individual RR-LCS
3Modern LMs are typically trained on a vocabulary of sub-
word tokens rather than words; however, this does not affect
our analysis for reasons discussed in the following section.
model instances at different forgetting rates to sim-
ulate different patterns of working memory engage-
ment. As all aspects of the RR-LCS model are
learned from monolingual corpora, we expect that
this model is capable of learning and reproducing
language-specific effects.
In contrast to standard surprisal, which condi-
tions on an exact word sequence, LCS conditions
on a noisy memory representation of the preceding
context:
−log P(wT+1|MT )
(2)
where M is a lossy representation generated from
w1 . . . wT . At a given forgetting rate, for a given
word sequence w1...T , RR-LCS learns to stochas-
tically retain or delete specific words from MT .
Reconstructions of the missing words are then sam-
pled, on the basis of language statistics, from a
reconstruction model, and the overall surprisal of
the noisy sequence is computed using a standard
pretrained language model. We refer the reader to
Hahn et al. (2022) for further details. As RR-LCS
is computationally expensive, we train a limited set
of models for two languages, English and German,
229

with the subword version of RR-LCS (McCurdy
and Hahn, 2024). We use BLOOM as the base LM
for German, and GPT2-L as the base LM for En-
glish. We train 3 instances of the RR-LCS model at
forgetting rates 20%, 30%, and so on, up to 80%.4
3.2
Evaluation
Stimuli
We evaluate the grammaticality illusion
using the Dutch, German, and English stimuli
developed by Vasishth and colleagues (Vasishth
et al., 2010; Frank et al., 2016). Each stimulus
item appears both as a grammatical double-center-
embedded construction (e.g. 1a) and with an un-
grammatical missing verb (e.g. 1b). Table 2 illus-
trates an additional manipulation: in the English
and German stimuli, subject noun phrases are either
all animate, or the second noun is replaced with an
inanimate object. Vasishth et al. (2010) describe
this manipulation as motivated by interference, but
do not discuss it any further. Frank et al. (2021)
do not reproduce this animacy manipulation, so the
Dutch stimuli only include animate subject nouns.
Critical region
We focus on the determiner im-
mediately following the third verb, for reasons illus-
trated by Figure 2. Across all three languages, we
observe the grammaticality effect (in German and
Dutch) or illusion (in English) on the post-verbal
noun phrase, especially the beginning of the phrase
— the determiner. This makes sense: if the reader
expects a third verb, and sees a determiner instead,
this mismatch in expectation should yield higher
RT at this location. We also observe higher RT
on the noun, but this may reflect spillover effects
(e.g. Rayner, 1998). Processing difficulty appears
initially on the determiner; therefore, our analysis
of LM surprisal focuses on this region.
4
Results
4.1
Language model surprisal
Figure 3 shows language model (LM) surprisal
results Dutch and German, including only stim-
uli in the animate condition. Across model sizes,
Dutch LMs show a robust preference for gram-
matical sentences, reproducing the effect found in
human reading times (Frank et al., 2016; Frank
and Ernst, 2019). By contrast, larger German LMs
show higher surprisal for grammatical compared
to ungrammatical stimuli — in other words, they
4We omit deletion rates of 10% and 90% for reasons of
stability, as these models have high rates of invalid output.
NL
GerPT2
BLOOM
LEO−7B
LEO−13B
DE
GPT2−S−NL
GPT2−M−NL
LLaMA2−NL
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
Multilingual
DE
NL
mGPT−1.3B
LLaMAX
EuroLLM
mGPT−13B
3
6
9
5
10
Condition
Gramm.
Ungramm
Figure 3: Language model surprisal for animate stimuli
in German (upper) and Dutch (lower), for monolingual
(left) and multilingual (right) models. Models are or-
dered left-to-right by parameter count. Dutch models
consistently prefer grammatical sentences (lower sur-
prisal), while larger German models unexpectedly show
the grammaticality illusion.
show the grammaticality illusion. This is highly
unexpected, as Vasishth et al. (2010) conducted
multiple experiments with German speakers across
different modalities, and never found a preference
for ungrammatical sentences.
While Dutch LMs of all capacities prefer gram-
matical sentences, and German LMs flip from the
grammatical to ungrammatical preference as the
models grow in size, English language models
(Figure 4) show an even more variable trajectory.
Small models trained on human-scale data, such as
GPT-BERT (the top performing model in the 2024
BabyLM competition; Charpentier and Samuel,
2024), do not consistently prefer either condition.
As model size increases, we see the opposite of the
illusion: GPT2 and GPT2-L assign lower surprisal
to the grammatical sentence. This outcome — that
230

Language
Animacy
Example item
English
All Animate
The dancer who the singer who the bystander admired...
N2 Inanimate
The dancer who the shoe that the bystander admired...
German
All Animate
Der Tänzer, den der Artist, den der Zuschauer bewunderte,...
N2 Inanimate
Der Tänzer, den der Schuh, den der Zuschauer bewunderte,...
Dutch
All Animate
De danser die gisteren de zanger die laatst de toeschouwer bewonderde...
Table 2: Example items by language and animacy. Each item is continued in both the grammatical and ungrammatical
(missing verb) condition. German and English stimuli (from Vasishth et al., 2010) include an animacy manipulation,
in which an inanimate object replaces the second subject noun. The inanimate condition is not included in the Dutch
stimuli (from Frank et al., 2016).
EN
Multilingual
GPT−BERT−S
GPT2−mini
GPT−BERT
GPT2
GPT2−L
GPT−Neo
GPT−J
DeepSeek
LLaMA2−7B
LLaMA2−13B
mGPT−1.3B
LLaMAX
EuroLLM
mGPT−13B
2
4
6
Grammatical
Ungrammatical
Figure 4: Grammaticality effects for animate stimuli in English LMs. Models are ordered left-to-right by size.
Medium-sized models (e.g. GPT2) prefer grammatical sentences, while larger models (e.g. DeepSeek, LLaMA2)
prefer ungrammatical sentences.
English LMs successfully learn the correct syntax
of double center-embedded sentences — is surpris-
ing under the language statistics hypothesis: if the
grammaticality illusion reflects distributional statis-
tics of English, how do GPT2 and GPT2-L learn
to predict a third verb in vanishingly rare double
center embeddings? On the other hand, it’s fully
compatible with the memory account: as LMs grow
in capacity, they can memorize linguistic events of
increasing rarity (Oh et al., 2024) — to align them
with human processing, we need to model memory
constraints, as in (RR-)LCS.
As English LM size keeps increasing, however,
the results become even more complex: larger mod-
els (e.g. GPT2-Neo and GPT-J) lose the grammati-
cal preference, and the largest models we evaluate
(Deepseek, LLaMA2) show the reverse preference
— i.e. the grammaticality illusion. This outcome
reverses our previous interpretation of the hypothe-
ses. The language statistics account now looks like
the decisive victor. Increased exposure to English
language data leads the models to prefer ungram-
matical sentences with missing verbs, and with
parameter counts in the billions, their behavior is
unlikely to reflect general memory limitations.
To compare grammaticality effects across mod-
els, we fit generalized linear mixed-effects mod-
els.5 We report the t statistic as a measure of how
reliably each LM distinguishes grammatical from
ungrammatical sentence. In this case, as all mod-
els are evaluated on the same set of stimuli, larger
values for t indicate more consistent differentiation
between the two conditions; for instance, t values
above 2 are often used heuristically to indicate sta-
tistical significance.
Figure 5 plots the results by model size and train-
ing data size, with separate plots for animate and
inanimate stimuli. In English models, we see that
training data size and model size both align with the
puzzling pattern discussed above: medium-sized
5We use the lme4 library (Bates et al., 2015) in R (R
Core Team, 2023) with the following formula: Surprisal
˜ Condition + (1|Item).
231

Grammaticality effect (T−statistic)
All Animate Subjects
Inanimate Second Subject
1e+08
1e+09
1e+10
1e+08
1e+09
1e+10
−5
0
5
10
Parameter Count
Language
NL
EN
DE
Base Model Family
DeepSeek
GPT
GPT−BERT
Llama
All Animate Subjects
Inanimate Second Subject
1e+08 1e+09 1e+10 1e+11 1e+121e+08 1e+09 1e+10 1e+11 1e+12
−5
0
5
10
Training Data (N Tokens)
Figure 5: Summary of grammaticality effect (measured by t-statistic) by language and model size in pre-trained
LMs, plotted by model size (upper) and training data size (lower). Diamond outline indicates multilingual model.
Negative t-value indicates preference for the ungrammatical sentence, i.e. the grammaticality illusion. Dotted lines
indicate approximate significance threshold (|t| > 2). Trend line fit by generalized additive model (GAM) with 3
basis dimensions. Increased training data exposure drives cross-linguistic divergence: German and Dutch models
increasingly prefer grammatical sentences, while English models increasingly prefer ungrammatical sentences.
models prefer grammatical sentences, while larger
models prefer ungrammatical sentences. In Ger-
man and Dutch, however, we see that model size
may be a misleading measure. A clearer relation-
ship emerges with training data size: the more
Dutch or German data an LM trains on, the stronger
its preference for grammatical sentences. This out-
come appears compatible with the language statis-
tics hypothesis once again — it seems that all mod-
els develop stronger human-like language-specific
preferences with increased exposure to data from
the relevant language. For German, however, we
still have the core mystery of how any LM learns
the ungrammatical preference in the first place,
given that this preference has never been found
in experiments with German speakers.
Finally, we conduct a comparative statistical
analysis using the reading time (RT) data released
by Frank et al. (2016) (Figure 2). For each LM,
we fit a linear mixed effects model6 to asses how
6Formula: RT ˜ Surprisal + (1|Subject) + (1|Item)
well its surprisal value predicts reading times on
critical regions in Dutch and English. Model fit
was compared using Akaike’s An Information Cri-
terion (AIC). In Dutch, all LMs showed roughly
the same goodness of fit, within a limited AIC
range. For Dutch speakers reading English, bigger
models were better, with both LLaMA models and
EuroLLM showing a relative reduction of roughly
5 units.
4.2
Resource-Rational Lossy Context
Surprisal
Our aim with RR-LCS is to test whether simulat-
ing lossy memory can also induce the grammati-
cality illusion for an LM that does not have it at
the outset. Moreover, we expect RR-LCS to cap-
ture language-specific effects. Futrell et al. (2020)
demonstrate that LCS can handle such effects in
principle, by showing that the model predicts differ-
ent directional outcomes for English and German
— specifically, the grammaticality illusion arises at
a relatively low forgetting rate for English, while
232

2
4
6
8
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
80%
 
Lossy Context Surprisal
(a) RR-LCS in German, base model BLOOM.
2
4
6
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
 
Lossy Context Surprisal
Condition
grammatical
ungrammatical
(b) RR-LCS in English, base model GPT2-L.
Figure 6: Grammaticality effects for resource-rational lossy context surprisal (RR-LCS; Hahn et al., 2022) at a
range of forgetting rates for German and English. While the magnitude of the grammaticality effect differs across
languages, both models switch from preferring grammatical to ungrammatical sentences at 60% forgetting.
the same forgetting rate for German predicts the
opposite effect. Although the previous experiment
yielded some unexpected outcomes in both Ger-
man and English, our selected base LMs — Bloom
in German, and GPT2-L in English — prefer gram-
matical sentences from the start. Thus, we expect
that increasing the forgetting rate under RR-LCS
will cause this preference to change, and we expect
that this change will occur at an earlier forgetting
rate for English than for German.
We find that increasing the forgetting rate in
RR-LCS successfully yields the grammaticality il-
lusion for both English and German (Figure 6).
Unexpectedly, the illusion arises at the same for-
getting rate for both languages, even though they
start from very different points. The German model
strongly prefers grammatical sentences for all for-
getting rates up to 50%, then at 60% switches to
favoring the missing verb condition. The English
GPT2-L model also prefers grammatical sentences
at lower forgetting rates, although the preference
is weaker — then, as for the German model, at a
60% forgetting rate it switches to preferring the
ungrammatical construction.
This outcome is somewhat challenging to inter-
pret. On the one hand, it is consistent with the
perspective that general memory limitations can
drive the grammaticality illusion. Previous compu-
tational work has demonstrated this broad conclu-
sion (Futrell and Levy, 2017; Futrell et al., 2020),
but relied upon simulated datasets based on corpus
statistics. To the best of our knowledge, our work is
the first to show that data-driven approximations to
noisy contexts can also produce the grammaticality
illusion with surprisal calculations from modern
neural language models. Neural models trained
on the language modeling objective mirror human
language processing in many respects, suggesting
possible broader cognitive implications.
On the other hand, this outcome does not fully
reproduce a key modeling aim of LCS as presented
by Futrell et al. (2020), which is to account for how
language-specific effects in different directions can
arise under the same memory constraints. Our RR-
LCS model captures language-specific differences
in effect magnitude, as the preference for gram-
matical sentences is weaker in English at lower
forgetting rates; however, it does not reflect the
directional interaction. This could, however, reflect
a technical failure on our part, or other limitations
that may be resolved in future work.
5
Conclusions
In this work, we investigated whether the gram-
maticality illusion seen in behavioral studies of
English speakers reflects language-specific statis-
tics or memory limitations. Using Dutch, Ger-
man, and English LMs, we found evidence for
both. Dutch results match the language statistics
account, and large English models reproduce the
illusion — but mid-sized English and large Ger-
man models show the reverse, which the statistics
account cannot explain. Resource-Rational Lossy
Context Surprisal produces the illusion at high for-
getting rates in English and German, but misses
a key language-specific difference in effect direc-
tion. While neither factor fully captures the rele-
vant human patterns, we find that both influence
how language models process complex sentences.
233

Limitations
One key aspect missing from our analysis is a lossy
context model trained on Dutch. We did not antici-
pate that Dutch models would show such a robust
grammaticality preference relative to German mod-
els, such that Dutch provides a better test case for
the interaction of language statistics with RR-LCS.
The time and computational cost of training RR-
LCS models prevented us from conducting this
analysis.
Another limitation of the paper is its focus on
only Germanic languages, when similar grammat-
icality illusions have been found for a typologi-
cally diverse range of languages, such as Spanish,
French, Mandarin, and Korean. Our analysis fo-
cuses on languages for which a range pre-trained
language models are available, but this criterion
likely reflects and reinforces broader inequalities
in which languages are researched.
Acknowledgments
The first author is funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) – Project-ID 232722074 – SFB 1102.
References
Suhas Arehalli, Brian Dillon, and Tal Linzen. 2022.
Syntactic Surprisal From Neural Models Predicts,
But Underestimates, Human Processing Difficulty
From Syntactic Ambiguities.
In Proceedings of
the 26th Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL), pages 301–313, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid). Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Suhas Arehalli and Tal Linzen. 2024. Neural Networks
as Cognitive Models of the Processing of Syntactic
Constraints. Open Mind, 8:558–614.
Markus Bader. 2016. Complex center embedding in
German – The effect of sentence position. In Sam
Featherston and Yannick Versley, editors, Quanti-
tative Approaches to Grammar and Grammatical
Change: Perspectives from Germanic, pages 9–32.
De Gruyter Mouton.
Douglas Bates, Martin Mächler, Ben Bolker, and Steve
Walker. 2015. Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models
Using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1):1–
48.
Sid Black, Gao Leo, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy,
and Stella Biderman. 2021.
GPT-Neo:
Large
Scale Autoregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-
Tensorflow. If you use this software, please cite it
using these metadata.
Lucas Georges Gabriel Charpentier and David Samuel.
2024. BERT or GPT: why not both?
In The 2nd
BabyLM Challenge at the 28th Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 262–
283, Miami, FL, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Morten H Christiansen and Nick Chater. 1999. Toward a
Connectionist Model of Recursion in Human Linguis-
tic Performance. Cognitive Science, 23(2):157–205.
Morten H. Christiansen and Maryellen C. MacDonald.
2009. A Usage-Based Approach to Recursion in Sen-
tence Processing. Language Learning, 59(s1):126–
161.
Christine Cuskley, Rebecca Woods, and Molly Flaherty.
2024. The Limitations of Large Language Models
for Understanding Human Language and Cognition.
Open Mind, 8:1058–1083.
Wietse de Vries and Malvina Nissim. 2020. As good
as new. how to successfully recycle english gpt-
2 to make models for other languages.
Preprint,
arXiv:2012.05628.
DeepSeek-AI, :, Xiao Bi, Deli Chen, Guanting
Chen, Shanhuang Chen, Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng,
Honghui Ding, Kai Dong, Qiushi Du, Zhe Fu,
Huazuo Gao, Kaige Gao, Wenjun Gao, Ruiqi
Ge, Kang Guan, Daya Guo, Jianzhong Guo, and
69 others. 2024.
Deepseek llm: Scaling open-
source language models with longtermism. Preprint,
arXiv:2401.02954.
Felix Engelmann and Shravan Vasishth. 2009.
Pro-
cessing grammatical and ungrammatical center em-
beddings in English and German: A computational
model. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling, Manchester, UK.
Erwan Fagnou. 2024.
Gpt-2 mini.
https://
huggingface.co/erwanf/gpt2-mini.
Stefan Frank. 2014. Modelling reading times in bilin-
gual sentence comprehension. In Proceedings of the
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, vol-
ume 36. Issue: 36.
Stefan L. Frank and Patty Ernst. 2019.
Judge-
ments about double-embedded relative clauses dif-
fer between languages.
Psychological Research,
83(7):1581–1593.
Stefan L. Frank, Patty Ernst, Robin L. Thompson, and
Rein Cozijn. 2021. The missing-VP effect in readers
of English as a second language. Memory & Cogni-
tion, 49(6):1204–1219.
Stefan L. Frank, Thijs Trompenaars, and Shravan
Vasishth. 2016.
Cross-Linguistic Differences in
Processing Double-Embedded Relative Clauses:
Working-Memory Constraints or Language Statis-
tics? Cognitive Science, 40(3):554–578. Publisher:
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
234

Richard Futrell, Edward Gibson, and Roger P. Levy.
2020.
Lossy-Context Surprisal: An Information-
Theoretic Model of Memory Effects in Sentence Pro-
cessing. Cognitive Science, 44(3):e12814. _eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/cogs.12814.
Richard Futrell and Roger Levy. 2017. Noisy-context
surprisal as a human sentence processing cost model.
In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, pages 688–698,
Valencia, Spain. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Richard Futrell, Ethan Wilcox, Takashi Morita, Peng
Qian, Miguel Ballesteros, and Roger Levy. 2019.
Neural language models as psycholinguistic subjects:
Representations of syntactic state. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
Short Papers), pages 32–42, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Edward Gibson and James Thomas. 1999.
Mem-
ory Limitations and Structural Forgetting:
The
Perception of Complex Ungrammatical Sentences
as Grammatical.
Language and Cognitive Pro-
cesses, 14(3):225–248. Publisher: Routledge _eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/016909699386293.
Michael Hahn, Richard Futrell, Roger Levy, and Ed-
ward Gibson. 2022. A resource-rational model of
human processing of recursive linguistic structure.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
119(43):e2122602119. Publisher: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.
Helen W. Hamilton and James Deese. 1971. Compre-
hensibility and subject-verb relations in complex sen-
tences. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Be-
havior, 10(2):163–170.
Kuan-Jung Huang, Suhas Arehalli, Mari Kugemoto,
Christian Muxica, Grusha Prasad, Brian Dillon, and
Tal Linzen. 2024. Large-scale benchmark yields no
evidence that language model surprisal explains syn-
tactic disambiguation difficulty. Journal of Memory
and Language, 137:104510.
Nick Huang and Colin Phillips. 2021. When missing
NPs make double center-embedding sentences ac-
ceptable. Glossa: a journal of general linguistics,
6(1). Publisher: Open Library of the Humanities.
Jana Häussler and Markus Bader. 2015. An interfer-
ence account of the missing-VP effect. Frontiers in
Psychology, 6. Publisher: Frontiers.
Yinquan Lu, Wenhao Zhu, Lei Li, Yu Qiao, and Fei
Yuan. 2024. LLaMAX: Scaling linguistic horizons
of LLM by enhancing translation capabilities beyond
100 languages. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pages
10748–10772, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Kyle Mahowald, Anna A. Ivanova, Idan A. Blank,
Nancy Kanwisher, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and
Evelina Fedorenko. 2024. Dissociating language and
thought in large language models. Trends in Cogni-
tive Sciences, 28(6):517–540. Publisher: Elsevier.
Pedro Henrique Martins, Patrick Fernandes, João Alves,
Nuno M. Guerreiro, Ricardo Rei, Duarte M. Alves,
José Pombal, Amin Farajian, Manuel Faysse, Ma-
teusz Klimaszewski, Pierre Colombo, Barry Haddow,
José G. C. de Souza, Alexandra Birch, and André
F. T. Martins. 2024. Eurollm: Multilingual language
models for europe. Preprint, arXiv:2409.16235.
Kate McCurdy and Michael Hahn. 2024. Lossy Context
Surprisal Predicts Task-Dependent Patterns in Rela-
tive Clause Processing. In Proceedings of the 28th
Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 36–45, Miami, FL, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Benjamin Minixhofer. 2020. GerPT2: German large
and small versions of GPT2.
Byung-Doh Oh and William Schuler. 2023. Why Does
Surprisal From Larger Transformer-Based Language
Models Provide a Poorer Fit to Human Reading
Times?
Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 11:336–350.
Byung-Doh Oh, Shisen Yue, and William Schuler. 2024.
Frequency Explains the Inverse Correlation of Large
Language Models’ Size, Training Data Amount, and
Surprisal’s Fit to Reading Times. In Proceedings of
the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 2644–2663, St. Julian’s, Malta.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Malte Ostendorff and Georg Rehm. 2023. Efficient
Language Model Training through Cross-Lingual
and Progressive Transfer Learning. arXiv preprint.
ArXiv:2301.09626 [cs].
Claudia Pañeda and Sol Lago. 2024. The Missing VP
Illusion in Spanish: Assessing the Role of Language
Statistics and Working Memory. Open Mind, 8:42–
66.
Colin Phillips, Matthew W. Wagers, and Ellen F. Lau.
2011. 5 Grammatical Illusions and Selective Falli-
bility in Real-Time Language Comprehension. In
Syntax and Semantics, volume 37, pages 147–180.
Emerald Group Publishing, Bingley.
Björn Plüster and Christoph Schuhmann. 2023. LeoLM:
Igniting German-Language LLM Research | LAION.
R Core Team. 2023. R: A Language and Environment
for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statisti-
cal Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, and 1 others. 2019.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learn-
ers. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9.
235

Keith Rayner. 1998. Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research. Psy-
chological Bulletin, 124(3):372–422. Place: US Pub-
lisher: American Psychological Association.
Oleh Shliazhko, Alena Fenogenova, Maria Tikhonova,
Anastasia Kozlova, Vladislav Mikhailov, and Tatiana
Shavrina. 2024. mGPT: Few-Shot Learners Go Mul-
tilingual. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 12:58–79. Place: Cambridge,
MA Publisher: MIT Press.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Can-
ton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David
Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu,
and 49 others. 2023.
Llama 2: Open Founda-
tion and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. arXiv preprint.
ArXiv:2307.09288 [cs].
Bram Vanroy. 2023.
Language resources for
Dutch large language modelling.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.12852.
Shravan Vasishth, Katja Suckow, Richard L. Lewis, and
Sabine Kern. 2010. Short-term forgetting in sentence
comprehension: Crosslinguistic evidence from verb-
final structures. Language and Cognitive Processes,
25(4):533–567.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, NIPS’17, pages 6000–6010, Red Hook, NY,
USA. Curran Associates Inc.
Ethan G. Wilcox, Tiago Pimentel, Clara Meister, Ryan
Cotterell, and Roger P. Levy. 2023. Testing the Pre-
dictions of Surprisal Theory in 11 Languages. Trans-
actions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 11:1451–1470.
Ethan Gotlieb Wilcox, Michael Y. Hu, Aaron Mueller,
Alex Warstadt, Leshem Choshen, Chengxu Zhuang,
Adina Williams, Ryan Cotterell, and Tal Linzen.
2025. Bigger is not always better: The importance of
human-scale language modeling for psycholinguis-
tics. Journal of Memory and Language, 144:104650.
Yuhan Zhang, Edward Gibson, and Forrest Davis. 2023.
Can Language Models Be Tricked by Language Il-
lusions? Easier with Syntax, Harder with Semantics.
In Proceedings of the 27th Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages
1–14, Singapore. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
236
