Proceedings of the First BabyLM Workshop, pages 52–65
November 8, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics
Are BabyLMs Deaf to Gricean Maxims?
A Pragmatic Evaluation of Sample-efficient Language Models
Raha Askari1,2, Sina Zarrieß2, Özge Alacam2, Judith Sieker2
1Department of Humanities, University of Turin
2Computational Linguistics, Department of Linguistics, Bielefeld University
Abstract
Implicit meanings are integral to human com-
munication, making it essential for language
models to be capable of identifying and inter-
preting them. Grice (1975) proposed a set of
conversational maxims that guide cooperative
dialogue, noting that speakers may deliberately
violate these principles to express meanings be-
yond literal words, and that listeners, in turn,
recognize such violations to draw pragmatic
inferences. Building on Surian et al. (1996)’s
study of children’s sensitivity to violations of
Gricean maxims, we introduce a novel bench-
mark to test whether language models pre-
trained on <10M and <100M tokens can distin-
guish maxim-adhering from maxim-violating
utterances. We compare these BabyLMs across
five maxims and situate their performance rela-
tive to children and a Large Language Model
(LLM) pretrained on 3T tokens. We find that
overall, models trained on <100M tokens out-
perform those trained on <10M, yet fall short of
child-level and LLM competence. Our results
suggest that modest data increases improve
some aspects of pragmatic behavior, leading
to finer-grained differentiation between prag-
matic dimensions.
Our benchmark extends the BabyLM evalua-
tion suite to pragmatic aspects of language and
is publicly available.1
1
Introduction
Consider the following exchange: Sarah asks her
friend "What did you eat for lunch?", upon which
her friend might reply "I had something edible"
or "I had chicken soup with an extra small silver
spoon". While both responses are true and per-
fectly grammatical, the first one fails to provide the
amount of information Sarah’s question calls for,
and the second one contains excessive, unasked
details. Most listeners would expect an answer that
1https://huggingface.co/datasets/rahaaskari/
gricean_baby
is specific but not unnecessarily detailed, such as
"I had chicken soup".
In everyday conversation, such under- or over-
informative replies stand out as odd because they
do not provide the adequate amount of detail the
question asks for. The philosopher Grice (1975) ex-
plained such phenomena through his Cooperative
principle, which holds that speakers are generally
aware of what is conversationally suitable or unsuit-
able. He proposed a set of conversational maxims,
one of which, the maxim of Quantity, requires the
speaker to be as informative as necessary.
The ability to notice and interpret such devia-
tions from conversational norms is a key aspect of
pragmatic competence, and essential for successful
communication. In the evaluation of Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs), however, while models are
now routinely tested on a wide range of syntactic
tasks (e.g., Marvin and Linzen (2018); Hu et al.
(2020); Finlayson et al. (2021); Lampinen (2024);
Kryvosheieva and Levy (2025)), far fewer studies
target their ability to reason pragmatically (Ettinger,
2020; Fried et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2025a; Sieker
et al., 2025; Lachenmaier et al., 2025). This gap is
especially pronounced for resource-limited models
such as those developed for the BabyLM Challenge
(Warstadt et al., 2023; Choshen et al., 2024). One
possible reason is that, unlike syntax, pragmatics
does not easily lend itself to large-scale minimal-
pair test creation. Controlled operationalizations of
pragmatic phenomena, such as those in Sieker et al.
(2023) and Sieker and Zarrieß (2023), remain rare
and resource-intensive, highlighting the challenge
of designing systematic evaluation materials for
this domain.
In psycholinguistics, however, several diagnos-
tic tasks for pragmatic understanding already exist
(e.g., Doran et al. (2012); Degen and Tanenhaus
(2014); Romoli and Schwarz (2015); Tieu et al.
(2015)). One such task is the Conversational Viola-
tions Test (CVT), designed to investigate children’s
52

pragmatic abilities based on Gricean maxims, intro-
duced in Surian et al. (1996)’s study "Are Children
with Autism Deaf to Gricean Maxims?". In the
CVT, children are presented with short dialogues
where one answer follows one of Gricean conver-
sational maxims and another violates it. Children
are asked to identify the maxim-violating response.
This controlled forced-choice format makes the
CVT particularly attractive for LM evaluation: the
correct choice depends on recognizing conversa-
tional norms rather than relying solely on factual
knowledge or grammar, and the task fits well to es-
tablished evaluation methods that compare model-
assigned probabilities for a predefined set of can-
didate responses, as in grammatical acceptability
(Warstadt et al., 2020), abductive commonsense
reasoning (Zhao et al., 2023), or semantic relations
of compound nouns (Rambelli et al., 2024).
In this paper, we adapt the CVT into a bench-
mark for evaluating BabyLMs’ sensitivity to
Gricean maxims. Starting from the original 25
conversational items from CVT, we augment the
dataset automatically to over 2,250 items and re-
fine them through human annotation. We evaluate
a range of BabyLM baseline models (4 trained on
<10M and 4 trained on <100M words), compare
their performance to that of children from Surian
et al. (1996), and situate their results alongside an
LLM trained on more extensive data. In total, our
experiment produces 20,250 data points (across
8 BabyLMs and 1 LLM). Among the evaluated
models, BabyLMs trained on <100M tokens out-
performed those trained on <10M, yet both groups
fell short of achieving child-level pragmatic accu-
racy despite their developmental motivation. On
average, BabyLMs performed best when judging
truthfulness, but struggled most with assessing the
appropriate level of informativeness. The LLM
generally surpassed the BabyLMs and, in some
cases, even outperformed children, but still failed
to match children’s overall competence. Thus, de-
spite vastly larger training data, notable gaps persist
between model and child performance across sev-
eral maxims.
The contributions of this study are threefold: (1)
a novel, linguistically controlled benchmark for
testing pragmatic competence in data-limited LMs,
grounded in established psycholinguistic method-
ology; (2) an empirical analysis of BabyLMs’ per-
formance across different Gricean maxims; and (3)
a comparison of LM and child performance that
situates model behavior within a developmental
trajectory.
2
Background
Effective communication relies on more than just
producing grammatical sentences. Much of what
speakers communicate is conveyed implicitly, rely-
ing on the listener to infer meanings that go beyond
the literal words. To do so successfully, speak-
ers must choose utterances that are appropriate to
the conversational context, and listeners must inter-
pret them in light of shared assumptions, intentions
and social norms. Even a perfectly well-formed
sentence can be unhelpful, misleading or socially
awkward if it ignores these unspoken rules. The
study of how meaning is shaped by such contextual
factors is the domain of pragmatics, which rests on
the central idea that conversation is a cooperative
activity: participants work together to exchange
information efficiently and meaningfully. Grice
(1975) formalized this intuition in his Coopera-
tive Principle, according to which interlocutors are
generally aware of what is conversationally suit-
able or unsuitable at each stage of a dialogue. He
categorized this principle into four maxims, and ad-
ditionally discussed Politeness as what he termed
an "off-the-list" maxim:
• Quantity (Make your contribution as informa-
tive as required and do not make your contri-
bution more informative than is required)
• Quality (Do not say what you believe to be
false and do not say that for which you lack
adequate evidence)
• Relation (Be relevant)
• Manner (Be perspicuous, i.e., avoid obscurity,
avoid ambiguity, be brief and be orderly).
• Politeness (Be polite)
While these maxims are typically adhered to,
speakers may sometimes blatantly violate them by
saying one thing but implying another, producing
what is known as an implicature. For example,
when two colleagues are talking during a lunch
break, one might ask "Did you talk to the boss
about the promotion?", and the other might re-
ply, "I really like this food." This response violates
the maxim of Relation and prompts the listener
to search for the intended meaning, assuming the
other person remains cooperative and aware of the
maxims. In this case, for example, the interlocutor
53

is likely to infer that their colleague wishes to avoid
the topic and has not spoken to the boss. Over the
past decades, the Gricean maxims have become
a cornerstone of pragmatic theory, shaping how
researchers analyze and explain the ways people
interpret and produce language in context.
Developmental Studies.
Several developmental
psycholinguistic studies have examined the age at
which the sensitivity to such conversational viola-
tions emerges in humans (to name a few; Ack-
erman, 1981; Conti and Camras, 1984; Surian
et al., 1996; Surian et al., 2010; Okanda et al.,
2015 and Panzeri and Foppolo, 2021). In this di-
rection, Surian et al. (1996)’s study introduced the
Conversational Violations Test (CVT) to compare
the pragmatic abilities of children with autism and
specific language impairments to those of neurotyp-
ical children by incorporating Grice’s framework.
The maxims addressed in their study were Quantity
(divided into two maxims; I: Be informative and
II: Avoid redundant information), Quality, Relation
and Politeness. The CVT is a set of 25 short con-
versational items and contains 5 conversations for
each maxim. In their experiment, 8 neurotypical
children (mean age 6-7) were presented with tape-
recorded conversations featuring three puppets. In
each scenario, one puppet would ask a question,
and the other two would respond, only that one of
them would provide an answer that violated a con-
versational maxim. The children were then asked
to identify the puppet that gave the silly or funny
answer, i.e., the one that violated the maxim. See
Table 1 for examples for each maxim.
BabyLMs.
The BabyLM Challenge aims to
model human language development in order to
optimize language model pretraining under strict
data limitations. Tracks for submissions of text-
only models include the Strict-small track (trained
on <10M tokens) and the Strict track (trained on
<100M tokens). As a starting point for evaluation,
the organizers release a group of baseline models
accompanied with pretraining corpora, along with
an evaluation pipeline including benchmarks such
as BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020) or GLUE (Wang
et al., 2019)2. While these benchmarks provide
broad coverage of linguistic competence, they do
not directly and comprehensively assess pragmatic
abilities. Given the developmental motivation be-
2Find a complete overview of the BabyLM eval-
uation
pipeline
at
https://github.com/babylm/
evaluation-pipeline-2025.
Maxim
Example
Quantity I
Be informa-
tive
Q: How do you prefer your tea?
Follower: With milk.
Violator: In a cup.
Quantity II
Avoid
re-
dundant
informa-
tion
Q: Who is your best friend?
Follower:
My best friend is
John. He goes to my school.
Violator: My best friend is Peter.
He wears clothes.
Quality
Be truthful
Q: Where do you live?
Follower: I live in London.
Violator: I live on the moon.
Relation
Be relevant
Q: What games do you know?
Follower: I know how to play
football.
Violator: I know your name.
Politeness
Be polite
Q: Do you like my dress?
Follower: It’s pretty.
Violator: I hate it.
Table 1: Example items for different conversational
maxims from Surian et al. (1996)’s CVT. The Follower
adheres to the maxim, while the Violator does not.
hind BabyLMs, we argue that it is equally impor-
tant to examine whether such models exhibit the
pragmatic reasoning observed in humans.
Pragmatic Evaluation in LMs.
As pragmatic
knowledge is essential for successful communica-
tion, recent studies have explored whether LLMs
exhibit pragmatic reasoning.
Some studies re-
port that LLMs can perform competitively with
humans on specific tasks such as metaphor com-
prehension (Hu et al., 2023; Sanchez-Bayona and
Agerri, 2025), but many find that they still strug-
gle with a wide range of phenomena, including
sarcasm and jokes (Hu et al., 2023; Jentzsch and
Kersting, 2023), theory of mind (Shapira et al.,
2023; Trott et al., 2023; Gandhi et al., 2024), im-
plicit causality (Sieker et al., 2023; Kankowski
et al., 2025), context-dependent reference resolu-
tion (Junker et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2025b), or infer-
ences like presuppositions (Kabbara and Cheung,
2022; Sieker and Zarrieß, 2023; Tsvilodub et al.,
2024; Sieker et al., 2025; Lachenmaier et al., 2025).
When it comes to the Gricean maxims, Hu et al.
(2023), for example, evaluated LLMs’ ability to un-
derstand intended meanings by prompting models
with short English stories and asking what a char-
54

acter wanted to convey by flouting a maxim, given
a set of possible answers. They found that the mod-
els would generally assign higher probabilities to
literal meanings over the speaker’s intended mean-
ing. Similarly, LLMs demonstrated bias towards
literal meanings during a pragmatic evaluation for
Korean language by Park et al. (2024). In their ex-
periment, models performed poorly on the maxim
of Relation and well on the maxim of Quality when
selecting the pragmatic meanings from given op-
tions, but showed reversed patterns for open-ended
questions about the speaker’s intent. Yue et al.
(2024), on the other hand, evaluated models’ abil-
ity to infer implicated meanings in multi-turn Chi-
nese dialogues and found no significant variation
in model performances across maxims. Moreover,
most models failed to generate correct interpreta-
tions for implicatures despite being able to identify
them in a multiple-choice setting. Other examples
of pragmatic evaluations of LLMs by incorporat-
ing implicatures include (but are not limited to)
Zheng et al. (2021), who presented the GRICE
dataset for assessing the pragmatic reasoning of
LLMs while taking into account other aspects of
modern dialogue modeling like coreference; Cho
and Kim (2024), who compared cosine similari-
ties of literal meanings of scalar implicatures with
their pragmatic meanings; and Kurch et al. (2024),
who tested whether LLMs can derive atypicality
inferences that are triggered through information
redundancy.
Building on this line of work, we extend prior
studies on LM pragmatic competence and Gricean
maxims by introducing a child-directed, maxim-
balanced benchmark that enables direct comparison
between model and child performance. Inspired by
Surian et al. (1996)’s CVT, we compile a dataset of
2,250 conversational items in a controlled forced-
choice format. Our benchmark is particularly well-
suited to the BabyLM Challenge because its simple,
child-appropriate language and controlled design
offer a fine-grained, diagnostic test of pragmatic
abilities, while minimizing reliance on large-scale
training data or extensive world knowledge.
3
Approach
In order for pragmatic interpretations (those that
go beyond literal ones) to arise, a listener must
know the rules of conversation, recognize when
they are violated, and discern when an utterance
may be literally unfitting (uncooperative) yet prag-
matically acceptable (cooperative). Building on the
framework of Gricean maxims, Surian et al. (1996)
examined the pragmatic competence of children by
testing whether they could identify an uncoopera-
tive (i.e., maxim-violating) answer among a pair of
responses to a given question. We adopt this same
forced-choice paradigm to evaluate the pragmatic
sensitivity of language models.
Data.
We base our evaluation on the CVT and ex-
tend this resource into a large-scale benchmark by
generating additional CVT-style items with GPT-
4 (OpenAI, 2024) and manually curating the out-
puts to maintain child-level vocabulary3, grammat-
icality, naturalness and adherence to the targeted
maxim. The final dataset contains 2,250 dialogues,
balanced across five maxims: Quantity I, Quantity
II, Quality, Relation, and Politeness. Full details
of the augmentation process and quality control
criteria are provided in Appendix A.1. Also, see
Appendix A.2 for examples of experimental items
of our dataset.
Models.
We use the following baseline BabyLMs
pretrained on BabyLM corpora that were released
in two tracks (Strict for models trained on at most
100M tokens and Strict-small for models trained
on at most 10M tokens)4: two auto-regressive
LMs, namely GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and
Baby Llama (Timiryasov and Tastet, 2023) and
two masked LMs, namely LTG-BERT (Samuel
et al., 2023) and Roberta (Liu et al., 2019). Finally,
to assess the effect of more training data on the
pragmatic performance of language models and to
enable a comparison with an LLM, we evaluate the
decoder-only OLMo-1B (Groeneveld et al., 2024)
as a representative of fully open LLMs that has
been trained on 3T tokens.
Evaluation.
Using our curated dataset,
we
evaluate pragmatic sensitivity of language models
in an unsupervised setting.
Specifically, we
measure a model’s sentence acceptability for the
two candidate answers to a question: one that
follows a Gricean maxim (follower) and one that
violates it (violator). For incremental models, we
compute the conditional log-probability of the
answer given the question, while in the case of
3This is derived from the fact that the pretraining data
for baseline BabyLMs mostly consists of input received by
children.
4Baseline models for previous years and this year’s sub-
mission are available at https://huggingface.co/babylm
and https://huggingface.co/BabyLM-community.
55

masked language models, we use the improved
pseudo-log-likelihood proposed by Kauf and
Ivanova (2023).
In both cases, the probability
of the answer is calculated as the sum of the
log-probabilities of its tokens, normalized by
its length.
For each item, we assess whether
the model assigns a higher probability to the
maxim-following answer:
1[P(AnswerFollower | Question) > P(AnswerViolator | Question)]
Model accuracy for each maxim is defined as the
proportion of items for which the model assigns a
higher probability to the maxim-follower response.
We obtain models’ scores through Minicons
(Misra, 2022)5, which is is an open-source library
for extracting sentence acceptability measures in
language models.
4
Results
In Table 2, we report accuracy per maxim for the
BabyLM baselines in the Strict-small and Strict
tracks. Furthermore, we present the results from
OLMo-1B. Finally, as a reference point, we include
the results of children who were tested on the CVT
by Surian et al. (1996). In the following, we break
down the results by conversational maxim, model
architecture and model size.
Results by Gricean Maxim.
As shown in Table
2, model performance varies considerably across
different maxims in both the Strict-small and Strict
tracks. The maxims Quantity I (Be informative)
and Quantity II (Avoid redundant information) are
consistently the most challenging, with average ac-
curacies for all BabyLMs peaking at only 0.59. In
contrast, Quality (Be truthful) emerges as the easi-
est category for most BabyLMs with the average
accuracy as high as 0.74. Relation (Be relevant)
and Politeness (Be polite) generally fall in between
these extremes (although exceptions apply), with
the average accuracies above chance but below the
best Quality results.
This pattern suggests that factuality is easier for
BabyLMs to capture from limited data, likely be-
cause it can be learned from explicit statements and
lexical associations in the training data, whereas
judgments of informativeness and redundancy re-
quire more context-sensitive reasoning. The repre-
sentative examples from the original CVT in Table
1 illustrate this: in Quantity I, while "with milk"
5Available at https://github.com/kanishkamisra/
minicons.
falls in the range of pragmatically accepted an-
swers, "in a cup" might contain tokens (or token
combinations) that are more frequent in the train-
ing data. Across the other maxims, such frequent
continuations may similarly override pragmatic ap-
propriateness in model predictions.
To quantify how consistently models agree on
these difficulty patterns, we ranked maxims per
model and computed Kendall’s W. Agreement
was high in the Strict-small track (W = 0.80) and
moderate in the Strict track (W = 0.68), indicating
that models trained on less data tend to exhibit
more similar difficulty patterns. In both tracks, the
maxims Quantity I and Quantity II were generally
ranked as the hardest maxims. Full rankings and
statistics are reported in Table 3.
Inter-maxim Correlations.
To examine whether
performance
on
different
maxims
co-varies
across models, we computed Pearson correlations
between per-model accuracies across maxims for
each track (Figure 1). In the Strict-small track,
correlations between maxims tend to be extreme.
Quantity I and Quantity II show an almost perfect
correlation (r = 0.953).
The same track also
reveals a striking near-perfect correlation between
Relation and Politeness (r = 0.999), suggesting
that topicality and politeness violations may be
treated in similar ways. In contrast, Quality stands
out in the Strict-small track as largely decoupled
from the other maxims (near-zero or negative
correlations), which may indicate that detecting
literal implausibility (e.g., "on the moon", Table
1) behaves independently of other pragmatic
abilities under data constraints. In the Strict track,
correlations are overall weaker and more varied,
with some negative associations appearing for pairs
that were strongly positive in the Strict-small track
(e.g., Politeness vs. Quantity I, (r = −0.155), pos-
sibly reflecting a partial decoupling of politeness
from topicality and informativeness once models
have more data. Notably, the maxim of Quality
strongly correlates with Quantity I in the Strict
track (r = 0.931), despite being among the easiest
maxims in difficulty rankings (Table 3), showing
that correlation patterns capture co-variation rather
than absolute difficulty. Overall, the shift from
rather extreme relations in the Strict-small track
to more varied and generally weaker associations
in the Strict track complements the prior results,
suggesting that with more training data, models
begin to differentiate more between pragmatic
56

Quantity I
Quantity II
Quality
Relation
Politeness
Overall
Strict-small BabyLMs
GPT-2
0.59
0.59
0.61
0.66
0.80
0.65
Baby Llama
0.56
0.49
0.74
0.63
0.68
0.62
LTG BERT
0.45
0.45
0.76
0.58
0.46
0.54
Roberta
0.33
0.36
0.64
0.60
0.57
0.50
Average
0.48
0.47
0.69*
0.61
0.63
Strict BabyLMs
GPT-2
0.60
0.68
0.76
0.72
0.76
0.70
Baby Llama
0.55
0.64
0.75
0.67
0.70
0.66
LTG BERT
0.64
0.57
0.79
0.74
0.52
0.65
Roberta
0.51
0.47
0.67
0.68
0.59
0.58
Average
0.58
0.59
0.74*
0.70
0.64
LLM
OLMo-1B
0.76
0.83
0.83
0.84
0.67
0.79
Children
0.58
0.78
1.0
1.0
0.93
0.86
Table 2: Accuracy scores across the Gricean maxims. Strict-small models are pretrained on <10M tokens and Strict
models on <100M. OLMo-1B is pretrained on 3T tokens. All models are evaluated on 2,250 items, while child
accuracy scores are from 8 neurotypical children from Surian et al. (1996). For the Strict-small and Strict groups,
the highest score of each maxim is bolded. The highest average across all maxims is marked with (*).
Model
Quant. I
Quant. II
Qual.
Rel.
Polite
Strict-small
GPT-2
•
•
•
•
•
Baby Llama
•
•
•
•
•
LTG BERT
•
•
•
•
•
RoBERTa
•
•
•
•
•
Strict
GPT-2
•
•
•
•
•
Baby Llama
•
•
•
•
•
LTG BERT
•
•
•
•
•
RoBERTa
•
•
•
•
•
Table 3: Maxim difficulty rankings for each model (• =
easiest, • = hardest). Kendall’s W: Strict-small = 0.80,
χ2(4) = 12.80, p = 0.012; Strict = 0.68, χ2(4) = 10.80,
p = 0.029.
dimensions.
Effects of Architecture and Model size.
Refer-
ring to Table 2, it is further notable that across
both tracks, GPT-2 consistently outperforms LTG-
BERT and RoBERTa models, with BabyLLaMA
typically ranking second. RoBERTa BabyLM per-
forms worst overall, particularly on the Quantity
maxims.
Increasing the training data from the
Strict-small (<10M tokens) to the Strict (<100M to-
kens) track generally improves performance, espe-
cially for Quantity I and Quantity II, where average
scores increase by 0.09–0.12. Gains for Quality
and Relation are more modest, while Politeness
scores remain similar across tracks. Interestingly,
GPT-2’s Politeness score decreases in the Strict
track, suggesting that greater exposure to varied
language might introduce alternative patterns that
increase uncertainty in politeness judgments.
The large-scale OLMo 1B model substantially
outperforms all BabyLM baselines across the max-
ims, with the exception of GPT-2 Strict-small,
which scored 0.80 in Politeness. OLMo 1B scored
substantially higher on the maxim of Relation com-
pared to BabyLMs, indicating that sensitivity to
topic relevance tends to emerge with increased
training data.
The differences of scores may also reflect how
auto-regressive and masked LMs handle conver-
sational flow: in our setup, probability assign-
ment to an entire answer benefits from modeling
sequences as coherent continuations rather than
token-masked completions. The performance gap
between Strict-small and Strict models also indi-
cates that increased training data helps, but does not
eliminate the persistent difficulties with Quantity-
related judgments.
Comparison to Child Performance.
In Surian
et al. (1996), neurotypical children showed an over-
all high accuracy (0.86), likely reflecting the de-
velopment of Theory of Mind (Baron-Cohen et al.,
1985), the impairment of which damages recogniz-
ing speaker’s intended meaning. BabyLMs share
some similarities with children: like them, they
perform best on the maxim of Quality and worst
on the Quantity maxims (Table 2). However, they
do not demonstrate the the same high performance
57

Quantity I
Quantity II
Quality
Relation
Politeness
Quantity I
Quantity II
Quality
Relation
Politeness
1
0.953
1
0.016
-0.225
1
0.71
0.776
-0.625
1
0.704
0.758
-0.611
0.999
1
 Maxim correlations (Strict small)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pearson correlation
Quantity I
Quantity II
Quality
Relation
Politeness
Quantity I
Quantity II
Quality
Relation
Politeness
1
0.526
1
0.931
0.725
1
0.918
0.269
0.711
1
-0.155
0.725
0.053
-0.297
1
Maxim correlations (Strict)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pearson correlation
Figure 1: Pearson correlations between per-model accu-
racies across maxims. Top: Strict-small track. Bottom:
Strict track.
as children in maxims of Relation and Politeness.
Furthermore, children’s overall high accuracy indi-
cates that, by school age, they are already highly
sensitive to conversational norms.
In contrast,
BabyLMs reach only 0.50–0.70 of overall accu-
racy, underscoring a substantial gap in pragmatic
competence between small-scale LMs and six-to-
seven-year-old human speakers. The LLM shows a
different pattern: it surpasses children on the Quan-
tity maxims, indicating stronger performance on
informativeness-related judgments, but still falls
short on other maxims, especially Politeness, sug-
gesting that socially grounded pragmatic norms
do not emerge automatically from large-scale pre-
training. Overall, both small-scale and large-scale
models reveal persistent limitations in capturing
the full range of conversational norms.
Summary and Discussion.
Across both data
tracks, the greatest deficits in BabyLM perfor-
mance concerned judgments of informativeness
required for an appropriate response. The maxim
of Quality was the easiest, with Relation and Po-
liteness in between (Tables 2 and 3). Correlation
analyses further revealed that, under severe data
constraints, most maxims were strongly associated
with at least one other (e.g., Quantity I and II; Rela-
tion and Politeness) (Figure 1). These associations
tended to weaken with more data, indicating a shift
toward more differentiated treatment of pragmatic
categories. Among architectures, GPT-2 performed
best overall, RoBERTa worst, and scaling from
<10M to <100M tokens yielded the largest gains
on Quantity, though sometimes at the expense of
Politeness (Table 2), suggesting that autoregres-
sive modeling and modest scaling benefit informa-
tiveness but may reduce social-pragmatic sensitiv-
ity. Compared to children, (0.86 overall, Table 2),
BabyLMs mirrored the relative ordering of diffi-
culty but scored substantially lower (0.50–0.70).
The LLM (OLMo-1B) outperformed BabyLMs’
overall performance in all maxims and exceeded
child performance on Quantity, yet lagged consider-
ably on the remaining maxims, showing that large-
scale pretraining enhances information-structuring
abilities but offers limited gains in other dimen-
sions of pragmatic understanding.
Our results align with earlier findings that prag-
matic competence in language models scales with
model size and training data but may remain be-
low human levels. For instance, Hu et al. (2023)
reported that GPT-2 with 117M parameters did not
perform above chance when interpreting maxim-
flouting utterances, in line with our observation that
BabyLMs trained on <100M tokens perform rather
poorly across maxims. At the other end of the scale,
Yue et al. (2024) found that LLaMA 2 models with
13B parameters performed above chance across
several Gricean maxims but still achieved only
about half the human score, while GPT-4 matched
human performance. In this context, our results
with OLMo-1B suggest that large-scale pretraining
can surpass child performance on informativeness
but still leaves substantial gaps on more socially
grounded maxims such as Politeness.
Overall, these findings indicate that scaling data
and parameters improves some aspects of prag-
matic reasoning in language models, while their
absolute performance remains far from child-like.
This underscores the importance of dedicated evalu-
ation benchmarks targeting pragmatic abilities, en-
suring that the developmental goals of the BabyLM
challenge address this crucial aspect of language
58

use.
5
Conclusion
This paper introduced a novel large-scale bench-
mark for evaluating the pragmatic competence of
language models, grounded in the Gricean max-
ims and adapted from a psycholinguistic test suite.
Using 2,250 conversational items, we assessed
BabyLM baseline models trained on constrained
data alongside a large-scale 3T-token model and
projected their performance on that of children.
Our results indicate that increasing training data
from <10M to <100M tokens leads to performance
gains, yet BabyLMs remain below child-level com-
petence.
They demonstrated the lowest perfor-
mance in assessing the appropriate amount of infor-
mation for conversationally acceptable responses
and did not exhibit a preference for answers that
were more polite or contextually relevant. Fur-
thermore, correlation analyses revealed that under
data-limited conditions, models tend to conflate cer-
tain pragmatic competences, but these associations
weaken with more data, suggesting that additional
exposure allows models to more clearly differenti-
ate between distinct pragmatic dimensions.
Our
benchmark
provides
a
linguistically
grounded, scalable evaluation resource that enables
systematic and comparable measurement of
pragmatic behavior across models of different
sizes and training regimes.
By extending the
BabyLM evaluation suite with a dedicated
pragmatic benchmark, this work provides a tool for
systematically tracking progress on this essential
aspect of human-like language understanding.
Limitations and Future Directions.
In this sec-
tion, we state the limitations of our study and pos-
sible directions they offer for future work.
First, unlike other datasets (Zheng et al., 2021;
Hu et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024), the conversa-
tional items in our dataset do not include detailed
scenarios that are embedded before prompting mod-
els with dialogues. In certain contexts, the maxim-
violator responses in our dataset could be in fact ap-
propriate; for instance, the answer "My best friend
is Peter. He wears clothes." (Table 1) would not be
redundant in a scenario where others are unclothed.
However, even within a minimal-context setting
like the one implemented in this study, non-linguist
participants have been shown to consistently fa-
vor responses that adhere to conversational max-
ims. For example, Okanda et al. (2015) applied
a revised Japanese version of the CVT and found
that adults were able to identify non-cooperative
answers and articulate the reasoning behind their
judgments. Nevertheless, future work could ex-
pand our conversational items by introducing ex-
plicit context that would render maxim-violator
responses cooperative (as in the above-mentioned
example) to examine whether such framing would
change model preferences.
Second, we acknowledge that model probabil-
ity assignments may be influenced by the distribu-
tional properties of tokens independent of context,
which can make evaluations based on sequence
scores prone to bias. Future work could address
this by expanding the dataset to include a wider
range of lexical variations.
Third, we selected the 1B-parameter OLMo model
due to computational constraints. Although our
primary focus was on BabyLMs rather than large
models, evaluating systems of varying sizes offers
valuable comparative insights. Furthermore, as our
results suggest that model architecture affects prag-
matic performance, future work could test whether
these patterns hold for other architectures, such as
instruction-tuned or multimodal (Baby) models.
Finally, our dataset is currently limited to En-
glish; therefore, extending this evaluation to multi-
lingual settings would allow for more robust conclu-
sions and enable meaningful cross-linguistic com-
parisons of pragmatic competence.
Ethical Statement
Our work uses publicly available data from a psy-
cholinguistic study on children; we do not conduct
any new experiments involving human subjects.
No personal information from the original study
is shared, except for the mean age of participants
as reported by the authors. We do not train any
new models; instead, our evaluation dataset was au-
tomatically generated and subsequently reviewed
and refined by two of the authors. The dataset con-
sists of short, child-level conversational exchanges,
and we believe that none of the items raise ethi-
cal concerns or reinforce biases toward sensitive
groups. Our evaluation focuses exclusively on the
pragmatic competence of language models. We
do not address other potential harms or limitations
of these systems such as discrimination, toxicity
and misinformation Weidinger et al. (2021) which
remain important areas for continued investigation
and responsible deployment. We share our evalu-
59

ation dataset, code and model results publicly to
facilitate future use and promote transparency.
Acknowledgements
We warmly thank the anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments. We acknowledge sup-
port from several projects and funding institutions:
1) “SAIL: SustAInable Life-cycle of Intelligent
Socio-Technical Systems" (Grant ID NW21-059A),
an initiative of the Ministry of Culture and Science
of the State of Northrhine Westphalia; 2) Erasmus+,
a European Union funding that facilitates periods of
study or training abroad, 3) Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)
– CRC-1646, project number 512393437, project
B02.
References
Brian P Ackerman. 1981. When is a question not an-
swered? the understanding of young children of utter-
ances violating or conforming to the rules of conver-
sational sequencing. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 31(3):487–507.
Simon Baron-Cohen, Alan M. Leslie, and Uta Frith.
1985. Does the autistic child have a “theory of mind”
? Cognition, 21(1):37–46.
Ye-eun Cho and Seong mook Kim. 2024. Pragmatic
inference of scalar implicature by LLMs. In Proceed-
ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 4: Student Re-
search Workshop), pages 10–20, Bangkok, Thailand.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Leshem Choshen, Ryan Cotterell, Michael Y. Hu,
Tal Linzen, Aaron Mueller, Candace Ross, Alex
Warstadt, Ethan Wilcox, Adina Williams, and
Chengxu Zhuang. 2024.
[call for papers] the
2nd babylm challenge: Sample-efficient pretraining
on a developmentally plausible corpus.
Preprint,
arXiv:2404.06214.
Daniel J Conti and Linda A Camras. 1984. Children’s
understanding of conversational principles. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 38(3):456–463.
Judith Degen and Michael Tanenhaus. 2014. Process-
ing scalar implicature: A constraint-based approach.
Cognitive Science.
Ryan Doran, Gregory Ward, Meredith Larson, Yaron
McNabb, and Rachel E Baker. 2012. A novel experi-
mental paradigm for distinguishing between what is
said and what is implicated. Language, 88(1):124–
154.
Allyson Ettinger. 2020. What bert is not: Lessons from
a new suite of psycholinguistic diagnostics for lan-
guage models. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 8:34–48.
Matthew
Finlayson,
Aaron
Mueller,
Sebastian
Gehrmann, Stuart Shieber, Tal Linzen, and Yonatan
Belinkov. 2021.
Causal analysis of syntactic
agreement mechanisms in neural language models.
In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long
Papers), pages 1828–1843, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Daniel Fried, Nicholas Tomlin, Jennifer Hu, Roma Pa-
tel, and Aida Nematzadeh. 2023. Pragmatics in lan-
guage grounding: Phenomena, tasks, and modeling
approaches. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 12619–
12640, Singapore. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Kanishk Gandhi, J.-Philipp Fränken, Tobias Gersten-
berg, and Noah D. Goodman. 2024. Understanding
social reasoning in language models with language
models. In Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Asso-
ciates Inc.
Herbert P Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In
Speech acts, pages 41–58. Brill.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Evan Walsh, Akshita
Bhagia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord, Ananya
Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang,
Shane Arora, David Atkinson, Russell Authur, Khy-
athi Chandu, Arman Cohan, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai
Elazar, Yuling Gu, Jack Hessel, and 24 others. 2024.
OLMo: Accelerating the science of language mod-
els. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 15789–15809, Bangkok,
Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jennifer Hu, Sammy Floyd, Olessia Jouravlev, Evelina
Fedorenko, and Edward Gibson. 2023.
A fine-
grained comparison of pragmatic language under-
standing in humans and language models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 4194–4213, Toronto, Canada. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Jennifer Hu, Jon Gauthier, Peng Qian, Ethan Wilcox,
and Roger Levy. 2020. A systematic assessment
of syntactic generalization in neural language mod-
els. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
1725–1744, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Sophie Jentzsch and Kristian Kersting. 2023. ChatGPT
is fun, but it is not funny! humor is still challenging
large language models. In Proceedings of the 13th
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjec-
tivity, Sentiment, & Social Media Analysis, pages
325–340, Toronto, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
60

Simeon Junker, Manar Ali, Larissa Koch, Sina Zarrieß,
and Hendrik Buschmeier. 2025.
Are multimodal
large language models pragmatically competent lis-
teners in simple reference resolution tasks? In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL 2025, pages 24101–24109, Vienna, Austria. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jad Kabbara and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung. 2022. Inves-
tigating the performance of Transformer-Based NLI
models on presuppositional inferences. In Proceed-
ings of the 29th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 779–785, Gyeongju,
Republic of Korea. International Committee on Com-
putational Linguistics.
Florian Kankowski, Torgrim Solstad, Sina Zarrie§, and
Oliver Bott. 2025. Instruction tuning modulates dis-
course biases in language models.
Carina Kauf and Anna Ivanova. 2023. A better way
to do masked language model scoring.
Preprint,
arXiv:2305.10588.
Daria Kryvosheieva and Roger Levy. 2025. Controlled
evaluation of syntactic knowledge in multilingual lan-
guage models. In Proceedings of the First Workshop
on Language Models for Low-Resource Languages,
pages 402–413, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Charlotte Kurch, Margarita Ryzhova, and Vera Dem-
berg. 2024. Large language models fail to derive
atypicality inferences in a human-like manner. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Model-
ing and Computational Linguistics, pages 86–100,
Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Clara Lachenmaier, Judith Sieker, and Sina Zarrieß.
2025. Can LLMs ground when they (don’t) know:
A study on direct and loaded political questions. In
Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 14956–14975, Vienna, Austria.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Andrew Lampinen. 2024. Can language models handle
recursively nested grammatical structures? a case
study on comparing models and humans. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 50(3):1441–1476.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. Preprint, arXiv:1907.11692.
Bolei Ma, Yuting Li, Wei Zhou, Ziwei Gong, Yang Janet
Liu, Katja Jasinskaja, Annemarie Friedrich, Julia
Hirschberg, Frauke Kreuter, and Barbara Plank.
2025a. Pragmatics in the era of large language mod-
els: A survey on datasets, evaluation, opportunities
and challenges. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 8679–8696,
Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ziqiao Ma, Jing Ding, Xuejun Zhang, Dezhi Luo, Ji-
ahe Ding, Sihan Xu, Yuchen Huang, Run Peng, and
Joyce Chai. 2025b. Vision-language models are not
pragmatically competent in referring expression gen-
eration. Preprint, arXiv:2504.16060.
Rebecca Marvin and Tal Linzen. 2018. Targeted syn-
tactic evaluation of language models. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 1192–1202,
Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Kanishka Misra. 2022. minicons: Enabling flexible be-
havioral and representational analyses of transformer
language models. Preprint, arXiv:2203.13112.
Mako Okanda, Kosuke Asada, Yusuke Moriguchi, and
Shoji Itakura. 2015. Understanding violations of
gricean maxims in preschoolers and adults. Frontiers
in psychology, 6:901.
OpenAI. 2024.
Gpt-4 technical report.
Preprint,
arXiv:2303.08774.
Francesca Panzeri and Francesca Foppolo. 2021. Chil-
dren’s and adults’ sensitivity to gricean maxims and
to the maximize presupposition principle. Frontiers
in Psychology, 12:624628.
Dojun Park, Jiwoo Lee, Hyeyun Jeong, Seohyun Park,
and Sungeun Lee. 2024. Pragmatic competence eval-
uation of large language models for the Korean lan-
guage. In Proceedings of the 38th Pacific Asia Con-
ference on Language, Information and Computation,
pages 256–266, Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo University of
Foreign Studies.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, and 1 others. 2019.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learn-
ers. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9.
Giulia Rambelli, Emmanuele Chersoni, Claudia Col-
lacciani, and Marianna Bolognesi. 2024. Can large
language models interpret noun-noun compounds?
a linguistically-motivated study on lexicalized and
novel compounds. In Proceedings of the 62nd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 11823–
11835, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Jacopo Romoli and Florian Schwarz. 2015. An Experi-
mental Comparison Between Presuppositions and In-
direct Scalar Implicatures, pages 215–240. Springer
International Publishing, Cham.
David Samuel, Andrey Kutuzov, Lilja Øvrelid, and Erik
Velldal. 2023. Trained on 100 million words and still
in shape: BERT meets British National Corpus. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: EACL 2023, pages 1954–1974, Dubrovnik,
Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
61

Elisa Sanchez-Bayona and Rodrigo Agerri. 2025.
Metaphor and large language models: When surface
features matter more than deep understanding. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: ACL 2025, pages 17462–17477, Vienna,
Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Natalie Shapira, Guy Zwirn, and Yoav Goldberg. 2023.
How well do large language models perform on faux
pas tests? In Findings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages 10438–10451,
Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Judith Sieker, Oliver Bott, Torgrim Solstad, and Sina
Zarrieß. 2023. Beyond the bias: Unveiling the qual-
ity of implicit causality prompt continuations in lan-
guage models.
In Proceedings of the 16th Inter-
national Natural Language Generation Conference,
pages 206–220, Prague, Czechia. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Judith Sieker, Clara Lachenmaier, and Sina Zarrie§.
2025. LLMs struggle to reject false presuppositions
when misinformation stakes are high. Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
47.
Judith Sieker and Sina Zarrieß. 2023. When your lan-
guage model cannot Even do determiners right: Prob-
ing for anti-presuppositions and the maximize pre-
supposition! principle. In Proceedings of the 6th
BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting
Neural Networks for NLP, pages 180–198, Singapore.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Luca Surian, Simon Baron-Cohen, and Heather van der
Lely. 1996. Are children with autism deaf to gricean
maxims? Cognitive neuropsychiatry, 1:55–72.
Luca Surian, Mariantonia Tedoldi, and Michael Siegal.
2010. Sensitivity to conversational maxims in deaf
and hearing children. Journal of Child Language,
37(4):929–943.
Lyn Tieu, Jacopo Romoli, Peng Zhou, and Stephen
Crain. 2015. Children’s knowledge of free choice
inferences and scalar implicatures. Journal of Seman-
tics, 33(2):269–298.
Inar Timiryasov and Jean-Loup Tastet. 2023. Baby
llama: knowledge distillation from an ensemble of
teachers trained on a small dataset with no perfor-
mance penalty. Preprint, arXiv:2308.02019.
Sean Trott, Cameron Jones, Tyler Chang, James
Michaelov, and Benjamin Bergen. 2023. Do large
language models know what humans know? Cogni-
tive Science, 47(7):e13309.
Polina Tsvilodub, Paul Marty, Sonia Ramotowska, Ja-
copo Romoli, and Michael Franke. 2024. Experimen-
tal pragmatics with machines: Testing llm predictions
for the inferences of plain and embedded disjunctions.
Preprint, arXiv:2405.05776.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019.
Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis plat-
form for natural language understanding. Preprint,
arXiv:1804.07461.
Alex Warstadt, Leshem Choshen, Aaron Mueller, Adina
Williams, Ethan Wilcox, and Chengxu Zhuang. 2023.
Call for papers – the babylm challenge: Sample-
efficient pretraining on a developmentally plausible
corpus. Preprint, arXiv:2301.11796.
Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mo-
hananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R.
Bowman. 2020. BLiMP: The benchmark of linguis-
tic minimal pairs for English. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:377–
392.
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor
Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra
Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh,
and 1 others. 2021.
Ethical and social risks
of harm from language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.04359.
Shisen Yue, Siyuan Song, Xinyuan Cheng, and Hai Hu.
2024. Do large language models understand con-
versational implicature- a case study with a Chinese
sitcom. In Proceedings of the 23rd Chinese National
Conference on Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Main Conference), pages 1270–1285, Taiyuan, China.
Chinese Information Processing Society of China.
Wenting Zhao, Justin Chiu, Claire Cardie, and Alexan-
der Rush. 2023. Abductive commonsense reason-
ing exploiting mutually exclusive explanations. In
Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 14883–14896, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zilong Zheng, Shuwen Qiu, Lifeng Fan, Yixin Zhu, and
Song-Chun Zhu. 2021. GRICE: A grammar-based
dataset for recovering implicature and conversational
rEasoning. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pages
2074–2085, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
62

A
Appendix
A.1
Dataset Augmentation Details
In order to expand CVT for model evaluation, we
employed the GPT-4 chat interface (OpenAI, 2024)
to synthesize similar items. First, we provided
GPT-4 with a brief description of the maxims and
examples from the CVT, and asked it to generate
25 corresponding dialogue templates, each accom-
panied by two paraphrased versions of the question.
Answers were unchanged in the paraphrased ver-
sions; this was due to some answers being too short
to paraphrase, and we chose a unified method for
all items. Next, each template was presented with
its original CVT example, and GPT-4 was asked
to produce four new conversations per template,
using vocabulary appropriate for children. Finally,
the paraphrased versions of both the original CVT
items and the newly created conversations were
generated based on their respective templates. This
resulted in a dataset consisting of 25 CVT items
and 350 GPT-generated ones. Table 4 shows a
concrete example of this pipeline.
Two of the authors manually reviewed all 375
items and made adjustments based on the following
criteria:
• The follower’s answer does not follow the
maxim.
• The violator’s answer does not violate the
maxim.
• The paraphrased versions do not correctly
paraphrase the questions.
• The words exceed child-level vocabulary.
• The questions and/or answers are unnatural or
ungrammatical.
• The answers are inadequate for model evalua-
tion.
The last criterion reflects our effort to minimize
superficial differences between the follower and vi-
olator answers wherever possible. Since our evalua-
tion compares model probabilities for each answer
pair, irrelevant lexical differences would distort the
results. For example, in response to the question
Who is your best friend?, if one answer was My best
friend is John. He goes to my school. and the other
was My best friend is Peter. He wears clothes., not
replacing the names with a single name would intro-
duce noise unrelated to pragmatic reasoning. How-
ever, in some cases, such standardizations were not
applicable due to the nature of the maxims being
tested; for example, in the case of the maxim of
Relation, altering the content is necessary for the
violation.
Once approved, we diversified the dataset by as-
signing speaker names (Leslie, Joan, and Thomas)
and rotating them such that each conversation
had one name as the questioner and another as
the responder, used consistently across both re-
sponses.
The names were randomly selected
as English common names from the firstname
database at https://github.com/KarlAmort/
firstname-database. This process yielded a fi-
nal dataset of 2,250 conversational items, since six
variations with names were generated from each of
the 375 curated conversations.
63

Stage
Example
1. GPT-4 is prompted with a
Question: What would you like to buy in this shoe-shop?
dialogue from CVT
Follower: A pair of trainers.
Violator: A pair of shoes.
2. GPT-4 generates a template
Question: What would you like to buy in this [type of store]?
from the dialogue
Follower (specific, informative): [A concrete item you might buy
in that specific store]
Violator (vague, unhelpful): [A general category that lacks
specific information]
3. GPT-4 generates four new
1. Question: What would you like to buy in this toy shop?
dialogues from the template of
Follower: A teddy bear.
stage 2
Violator: A toy.
2. Question: What would you like to buy in this bakery?
Follower: A chocolate muffin.
Violator: Something to eat.
3. Question: What would you like to buy in this bookshop?
Follower: A Harry Potter book.
Violator: A book.
4. Question: What would you like to buy in this clothes shop?
Follower: A red jacket.
Violator: Some clothes.
4. GPT-4 generates 2
1. Is there something you’d like to get from this [type of store]?
paraphrased questions of the
2. What are you looking for in this [type of store]?
template of stage 2
5. GPT-4 generates 2
1. Question: Is there something you’d like to get from this shoe-shop??
paraphrased versions of the
Follower: A pair of trainers.
original CVT dialogue given in
Violator: A pair of shoes.
stage 1 and all other dialogues
2. Question: What are you looking for in this shoe-shop??
generated in stage 3
Follower: A pair of trainers.
Violator: A pair of shoes.
And so on
Table 4: An example of the data augmentation pipeline for the maxim of Quantity I (Be informative). The Follower
adheres to the maxim, while the Violator does not. For each dialogue in CVT, four more examples with child-level
vocabulary were created. Later, two paraphrased versions for all dialogues (those from CVT and GPT-generated
ones) were synthesized and added.
A.2
Dataset Examples
We depict a few examples from the dataset. The
maxim-violator’s answer is marked with (*).
Maxim of Quantity I (Be informative):
• Leslie: What did you eat for supper?
Thomas: Tomato soup.
Thomas: A dish.*
• Leslie: What did you see at the zoo?
Joan: The lions.
Joan: Some animals.*
• Leslie: What did you get for Christmas?
Joan: A gift.*
Joan: A toy train.
• Joan: How do you prefer your pancakes?
Leslie: On a plate.*
Leslie: With maple syrup.
Maxim of Quantity II (Avoid redundant infor-
mation):
• Leslie: Who is your neighbor?
Thomas: My neighbor is Mr. Tom. He has a
dog.
Thomas: My neighbor is Mr. Tom. He lives
in a house.*
• Joan: What pet do you like?
Leslie: I like puppies and kittens which are
pets.*
Leslie: I like puppies and kittens which are
cute.
• Leslie: Where did you go last weekend?
Joan: I went to grandma’s house and baked
cookies.
Joan: I went to grandma’s house and I didn’t
stay in my room.*
• Joan: Which is your favourite fruit?
Thomas: Watermelon which is a fruit.*
64

Thomas: Watermelon which is juicy.
Maxim of Quality (Be truthful):
• Thomas: Is there any more popcorn?
Leslie: Yes, there’s a bowl in the kitchen.
Leslie: Yes, it’s raining popcorn outside.*
• Leslie: Where do you do your homework?
Joan: I do them on a dragon’s back.*
Joan: I do them in my room.
• Joan: Do you have any pets?
Leslie: Yes, I have a cat and a fish.
Leslie: Yes, I have a thousand elephants.*
• Leslie: Why don’t you come outside?
Thomas: Because I’m helping mom bake.
Thomas: Because I’m on a spaceship.*
Maxim of Relation (Be relevant):
• Joan: What did you do on the weekend?
Thomas: I went to the zoo.
Thomas: My socks are green.*
• Thomas: What do you like to play?
Leslie: I like to play tag.
Leslie: I like chocolate cake.*
• Joan: What is your favourite animal?
Thomas: I like pencils best.*
Thomas: I like pandas best.
• Thomas: What songs do you know?
Joan: I know “Twinkle Twinkle Little Star.
Joan: I know how to tie my shoes.*
Maxim of Politeness (Be polite):
• Thomas: Do you like my new haircut?
Joan: It looks awful.*
Joan: It looks nice.
• Thomas: Would you like to try some of my
cake?
Joan: No, thanks.
Joan: No, it’s disgusting.*
• Joan: May I use your calculator?
Thomas: No, don’t touch my stuff.*
Thomas: No, sorry, I need it right now, but
you can use it after.
• Leslie: Could you help me with my puzzle?
Thomas: Do it by yourself.*
Thomas: Sure, after I finish this one.
65
